Bridging the Novice-Expert Gap via Models of Decision-Making:
A Case Study on Remediating Math Mistakes
Rose E. Wang

Qingyang Zhang

Susanna Loeb

Carly Robinson

Dorottya Demszky

Stanford University
rewang@cs.stanford.edu, ddemszky@stanford.edu
Abstract

arXiv:2310.10648v3 [cs.CL] 6 Apr 2024

Scaling high-quality tutoring remains a major
challenge in education. Due to growing demand, many platforms employ novice tutors
who, unlike experienced educators, struggle
to address student mistakes and thus fail to
seize prime learning opportunities. Our work
explores the potential of large language models (LLMs) to close the novice-expert knowledge gap in remediating math mistakes. We
contribute Bridge, a method that uses cognitive task analysis to translate an expert’s latent thought process into a decision-making
model for remediation. This involves an expert identifying (A) the student’s error, (B)
a remediation strategy, and (C) their intention before generating a response. We construct a dataset of 700 real tutoring conversations, annotated by experts with their decisions. We evaluate state-of-the-art LLMs on
our dataset and find that the expert’s decisionmaking model is critical for LLMs to close
the gap: responses from GPT4 with expert
decisions (e.g., “simplify the problem”) are
+76% more preferred than without. Additionally, context-sensitive decisions are critical to
closing pedagogical gaps: random decisions decrease GPT4’s response quality by -97% than
expert decisions. Our work shows the potential of embedding expert thought processes
in LLM generations to enhance their capability to bridge novice-expert knowledge gaps.
Our dataset and code can be found at: https:
//github.com/rosewang2008/bridge.

1

Introduction

Human tutoring plays a critical role in accelerating
student learning, and is one of the primary ways to
combat pandemic-related learning losses (Fryer Jr
and Howard-Noveck, 2020; Nickow et al., 2020;
Robinson and Loeb, 2021; of Education, 2021; Accelerator, 2022). To accommodate the growing demand for tutoring, many tutoring providers engage
novice tutors. While novice tutors may exercise

the domain knowledge, they often lack the specialized training of professional educators in interacting with students. However, research suggests that
novices with proper training can be effective tutors
(Nickow et al., 2020).
Responding to student mistakes in real-time is
a critical area where novice tutors tend to struggle.
Mistakes are prime learning opportunities to address misconceptions (Boaler, 2013), but effective
responses involve pedagogical expertise in engaging with student’s thinking and building positive
rapport (Roorda et al., 2011; Pianta, 2016; Shaughnessy et al., 2021; Robinson, 2022). Novices typically learn from experts to understand the expert’s
thought process however hiring experienced educators to provide timely feedback is resourceintensive (Kraft et al., 2018; Kelly et al., 2020).
One potential solution is the use of automated tutors (Graesser et al., 2004). With recent advances in
large language models (LLMs), this approach has
gained even more interest (Khan Academy, 2023).
However their ability to remediate is yet to be evaluated. Prior work suggests several shortcomings
with LLMs, including lacking reliable subject and
pedagogical knowledge (Frieder et al., 2023; Wang
and Demszky, 2023; Singer, 2023), that can be
mitigated using explicitly thought processes such
as through chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al.,
2022).
To address these challenges, our work makes
several key contributions. First, we build Bridge,
a method that leverages cognitive task analysis
to elicit the latent thought processes of experts.
We apply Bridge to remediation where we collaborate extensively with experienced math educators
to translate their thought process into a decisionmaking model. Bridge breaks down the experts’
thought process: illustrated in Figure 1, Step A is to
infer the student’s error (e.g., the student guessed);
Step B is to determine the remediation strategy
(e.g., provide a solution approach); and Step C is

1 Closing the knowledge gap at scale. LLMs and novice tutors lack the pedagogical knowledge to
Figure 1: ⃝
engage with student mistakes, yet they are readily available for 1:1 tutoring. Experts like experienced teachers
2 How do we model the expert’s thought process? Our
have the pedagogical knowledge, but are hard to scale. ⃝
work builds Bridge which leverage cognitive task analysis to translate the latent thought process of experts into a
3 Applying Bridge with LLMs. To bridge the knowledge gap, we scale the expert’s
decision-making model. ⃝
knowledge with LLMs using the expert-guided decision-making model.

to identify the strategy intention (e.g., to help the
student understand the concept).
We construct a dataset of real-world tutoring
conversations, annotated with expert decisions
and responses. Our open-source dataset consists
of 700 real tutoring sessions conducted with 1st5th grade students in Title I schools, predominantly
serving low-income students of color. Following
FERPA guidelines, our study is IRB-approved and
conducts secondary data analysis based on our
Data Use Agreement with the tutoring provider
and school district.
We conduct a thorough human evaluation to
compare the expert, novice and LLMs in remediation. To our knowledge, our work is the
first to assess the performance of LLMs such as
GPT4 and instruct-tuned Llama-2-70b on remediating student mistakes. We find that the response
quality of LLMs significantly improve with the
expert’s decision-making process: Response from
GPT4 with expert- and self-generated decisions
are 76-88% more preferred than GPT4 without.
Context-sensitive decisions are also critical to closing the knowledge gap: Random decisions decrease GPT4’s response quality -67% than expert
decisions. Complementing our quantitative analy-

sis, our lexical analysis reveals that novices and
LLMs without the expert’s decision-making process engage superficially with student’s problemsolving process: They give away the answer or
prompt the student to re-attempt without further
guidance (“double check”, “try again”).

2

Related Work

2.1

Modeling the Decision-Making Process of
Experts

Cognitive task analysis (CTA) uncovers the latent decision-making process of experts across a
range of domains such as education, medicine and
law (Ryder and Redding, 1993; Clark et al., 2008;
Klein, 2015). CTA decode the observable actions
(e.g., the expert’s remediation responses) into the
latent mental processes that generate the observable actions (e.g., the expert’s inferences about
the student’s mistake). A key application area of
CTA is to close knowledge gaps through real-time
decision aids that enhance the cognitive skills of
novices (Hall et al., 1995; Gagne and Medsker,
1996; Van Merriënboer, 1997; Klein, 2008; Zsambok and Klein, 2014); Lee (2004) discusses the significant improvements in novices with CTA across
multiple disciplines. While previous NLP works

have developed methods for auto-labeling CTA
transcripts (Du et al., 2019), less work has been
done on synthesizing models of expert decision
processes for natural language generation or contributing data with expert decisions. Our work contributes both the Bridge method and an accompanying dataset to this end.

latent thought process behind their responses, such
as their strategy choices and intentions, rather than
the observable linguistic attributes. We explore the
potential of leveraging expert-informed decisionmaking processes for bridging knowledge gaps and
constructing human-LLM interaction frameworks
grounded in expertise.

2.2

2.4

Responding to Student Mistakes in
Mathematics

Recognizing misconceptions is key to facilitating
meaningful student learning and retention (Stefanich and Rokusek, 1992; Wilcox and Zielinski,
1997; Riccomini, 2005; Stein et al., 2005; Schnepper and McCoy, 2013). Effective remediation coincides with educators engaging with the mathematical details in student responses, which in
turn fosters strong teacher-student relationships and
student motivation (Wentzel, 1997; Pianta et al.,
2003; Robinson, 2022; Wentzel, 2022; Easley and
Zwoyer, 1975; Brown and Burton, 1978; Carpenter
et al., 1999, 2003; Lester, 2007; Loewenberg Ball
and Forzani, 2009). Prior education research discusses multiple good practices in remediating student mistakes, ranging from visual aids (CAST,
2018) to the Socratic method (Lepper and Woolverton, 2002). However, less work has been done to
understand the thought process of an experienced
educator of when, how and why they use one strategy over another.
2.3

Automated Feedback in Education

Recent advances in NLP provide teachers feedback on their classroom discourse and have been
shown to be beneficial, cost-effective feedback
tools (Samei et al., 2014; Donnelly et al., 2017;
Kelly et al., 2018; Jensen et al., 2020; Jacobs et al.,
2022; Demszky and Liu, 2023; Wang and Demszky,
2023; Demszky et al., 2023). The development of
LLMs such as GPT-4 has re-kindled excitement
around autotutors in providing equitable access to
high-quality education (Graesser et al., 2004; Rus
et al., 2013; Litman, 2016; Hobert and Meyer von
Wolff, 2019; OpenAI, 2023; Khan Academy, 2023).
However, these models are known to unreliably
solve math problems and hallucinate (Frieder et al.,
2023; Ji et al., 2023). A human tutor in-the-loop
is key in catching these undesirable responses.
Our work is related to human-LLM approaches
that leverage expert-informed linguistic attributes
(Sharma et al., 2023; Handa et al., 2023). However,
critically, our work is about modeling the expert’s

Math Tutoring Datasets

While there are other, larger math tutoring datasets
such as CIMA from Stasaski et al. (2020) and
MathDial from Macina et al. (2023a), they are created from synthetic sources: CIMA simulates tutoring conversations amongst crowdsourced workers and MathDial simulates students with LLMs.
Prior work shows that synthetic sources result in
responses with lower pedagogical quality (Markel
et al., 2023; Tack and Piech, 2022). By contrast,
our dataset uses real experienced educators, human tutors and students from Title I schools with a
need of high-dosage tutoring. Additionally, prior
datasets focus on teacher strategies (e.g., “ask an
open-ended question”) and these strategies can often be directly observed in their responses (Stasaski
et al., 2020; Caines et al., 2020; Macina et al.,
2023b). Our work surfaces that there are other
hidden decisions that inform expert’s responses:
what the expert notices (e.g., the student’s error)
and why the expert uses a certain strategy (e.g.,
the teacher’s intention); Bridge bears similarity
with the Theory of Mind and POMDP planning
for teaching literature in modeling hidden information from observable responses (Rafferty et al.,
2016; Wang et al., 2020). By collaborating closely
with experts, our work builds faithful models of expert decision-making towards understanding how
experts think when they remediate.

3

Data Sources

Tutoring transcripts. Our data is sourced from a
tutoring provider that offers end-to-end services for
school districts, including the tutoring platform, instructional materials, and tutors. The research team
executed Data Use Agreements with the tutoring
provider and Southern U.S. school district serving
over 30k that outlined the allowable usage of the
data to improve instruction in collaboration with an
educational agency. Following FERPA guidelines,
we were eligible to engage in secondary data analysis with student data, which is what we did for this
study. The students in these tutoring sessions are

in the first to fifth grade, learning a variety of math
topics. The majority of schools are classified as
Title I and three-quarters of students identify as Hispanic/Latinx. This district focused on addressing
existing achievement gaps among their students,
as well as responding to the learning disruptions
caused by the pandemic. The tutoring interactions
are text-based, integrated on the providers’ online
platform. The platform has several features, including a whiteboard. The tutor communicates
primarily through text message in a chat box, while
the student uses either voice recording or the chat.
Preprocessing. The chat transcripts are deidentified by the tutoring provider. The student’s
name is replaced with [STUDENT] and the tutor’s
name is replaced with [TUTOR]. Our data uses
excerpts from the original tutoring chat sessions,
where the tutor responds to a mistake. Tutors on
this platform use templated responses to flag mistakes, such as “That is incorrect” or “Good try.” We
leverage these templates to create a set of signalling
expressions used by the tutor to identify excerpts.
Specifically, we search for a three turn conversation pattern where (1) the tutor sends a message
containing a question mark “?”, (2) the student responds via text, then (3) the tutor uses a signalling
expression. The set of signalling expressions were
validated on a random sample of 100 conversations
to ensure complete coverage. Appendix C includes
the full set of signalling expressions we use.

4

The Bridge Method for
Expert-Guided Decision-Making

We introduce Bridge which uses cognitive task
analysis (CTA) to analyze the experts’ latent
thought process (§4.1). We translate it into a
decision-making process (§4.3), where each step is
associated with a set of decision options (§4.2).
4.1

Cognitive Task Analysis

We conduct CTA with four experienced math teachers to develop a model of their decision-making
process for remediation. The number of experts
we work with is comparable to the numbers from
Cognitive Task Analysis works and other works
in NLP that engage with experts (Seamster et al.,
1993; Sullivan et al., 2014; Sharma et al., 2023;
Handa et al., 2023).
Collaboration with experts. We collaborated extensively with math teachers, spanning across sev-

eral months. We work closely with four math teachers from diverse demographics in terms of gender
(3 female, 1 male) and race (Asian, Black/African
American, White/Caucasian, Multiracial/Biracial).
Three have more than 8 years of teaching experience, and the other has 6 years of teaching experience. They also have taught in a broad range
of school settings including public schools, Title
1 schools, and charter schools. We compensate
the teachers developing the decision-making framework $50/hour. We compensate the teachers annotating the dataset with their decision steps and
responses at $40/hour.
Our objective is to faithfully capture their stepby-step decision process and develop a comprehensive set of decision options for each step. We work
with two math teachers to develop the decisionmaking process for remediation, and validated it
with two other math teachers. We conduct CTA
through a series of observations and interviews,
which involved cataloging patterns in their decisions; Cooke (1999) provides a comprehensive
overview of other CTA methods.
Development of decision-making process. We
provide the experts conversation examples containing student mistakes (identified from §3) and asked
them to directly revise the tutor’s remediation response to be more useful and caring. The experts
and co-author met on a weekly basis where we went
through the experts’ revisions and discussed their
approaches to each mistake. We used three questions to facilitate the discussion: (1) What did the
experts notice? (2) How did they want to react? and
(3) Why did they want to react in that way? Themes
emerged after a few meetings. Based on their own
experiences, experts inferred the student’s level of
understanding as context for their remediation response. This resulted in Step A: Infer the student’s
error to answer the first question. Experts used several techniques to engage with the student’s error,
such as asking questions and simplifying the problem to meet the student’s level of understanding.
The diverse strategies led to Step B: Determine the
strategy. Finally, the experts used strategies for
different ends depending on error. For example,
they might ask a question to hint at the mistake or
diagnose the student. This insight resulted in Step
C: Identify the intention behind the strategy. We
verified that this decision-making model mimicked
their thought process by asking them to apply it to
new tutoring conversations. We additionally veri-

fied it with two other experts who could seamlessly
use it during their remediation. For additional information about the development process, please
refer to Appendix A.
Development of decision options. We created
decision options for each step and edited the options through more iterations of the experts remediating using the step-by-step decision-making process. The options were finalized once the experts
and the co-authors were satisfied with the coverage
and with the natural fit of the model to the teachers’
remediation process.

dent’s understanding (Radatz, 1980). The strategies
are: Explain a concept, Ask a question, Provide a
hint, Provide a strategy, Provide a worked example, Provide a minor correction, Provide a similar
problem, Simplify the question, Affirm the correct
answer, Encourage the student, Other.

This section details each step’s decision options.
Due to space reasons, please refer to Appendix B
for examples of each option.

4.2.3 Step C: Identify the Intention
The intentions are: Motivate the student, Get the
student to elaborate their answer, Correct the mistake, Hint at the mistake, Clarify the misunderstanding, Help the student understand the lesson
topic or solution strategy, Diagnose the mistake,
Support the student in their thinking or problemsolving, Explain the mistake (e.g., what is wrong
in their answer or why is it incorrect), Signal to
the student that they have solved or not solved the
problem, Other.

4.2.1

4.3

4.2

Decision Options

Step A: Infer the Type of Error

Identifying the student’s error is prerequisite to
successful remediation (Easley and Zwoyer, 1975;
Bamberger et al., 2010). Our approach intends
to support novices who are not necessarily content experts. Therefore we define “error” as a student’s degree of understanding, which aligns with
literature on math curriculum design and psychometrics that maintain continuous scales of student
understanding (Gagne, 1962, 1968; White, 1973;
Resnick et al., 1973; Glaser and Nitko, 1970; Vygotsky and Cole, 1978; Wertsch, 1985; Embretson
and Reise, 2013). As such, our error categories
are topic-agnostic descriptions of a student’s understanding, and complement the topic-agnostic strategies in Step B. The categories are: guess: The
student does not seem to understand or guessed
the answer; misinterpret: The student misinterpreted the question; careless: The student made
a careless mistake; right-idea: The student has
the right idea, but is not quite there1 ; imprecise:
The student’s answer is not precise enough or the
tutor is being too picky about the form of the student’s answer; not-sure: Not sure, but I’m going
to try to diagnose the student (used sparingly); N/A:
None of the above (used sparingly).
4.2.2

Step B: Determine the Strategy

Errors are persistent unless the teacher intervenes
pedagogically with a strategy that guides the stu1

This category is different from careless in that students
with right-idea errors have difficulty in applying the concept
correctly, whereas students with careless apply the concept
correctly but make a minor numerical mistake.

Formalism for Expert Decision-Making
Process in Remediation

Given a conversation history ch , we formalize the
expert’s responses c∗r as being generated from the
following computational model:
c∗r ∼ p(cr |ch , |{z}
e , zwhat , zwhy ),
|{z} |{z}
Step A Step B Step C

where e is the error, zwhat the strategy, and zwhy
the intention. Our dataset contains 700 examples,
where each example is (ch , c′r , e, zwhat , zwhy , c∗r ).
Each example contains the conversation history
ch which includes the lesson topic and the last 5
conversation messages leading up to the student’s
turn where the mistake is made; i.e., ch [−1] is the
student’s conversation turn where they make a mistake. It also contains the novice tutor’s original
response to the student’s mistake c′r and the experts’ decision annotations and responses. Every
conversation is annotated with two ground-truth
expert responses. Our dataset covers 120 different
lesson topics, including “Word Problems with Fractions”, “Order of Operations” and “Graphing on a
Coordinate Grid”. We split the final dataset into a
train, validation, and test set with a 6:1:3 ratio. The
train set contains 420, validation 70, and test 210
examples.

5

Experiments

5.1

Models

We compare the expert-written responses
against three state-of-the-art models gpt-4,

Method
Condition
Model cr

Prefer

Useful

Care

Not Robot

Overall

Expert

1.26

1.19

0.86

0.78

1.02

None
None
None

Llama-2
GPT-3.5
GPT-4

0.49
0.47
0.54

0.48
0.47
0.54

0.45
−0.04
0.50

0.68
0.23
0.47

0.53
0.28
0.51

Expert
Expert
Expert

Llama-2
GPT-3.5
GPT-4

0.61
0.65
0.95

0.56
0.58
0.97

0.37
−0.04
0.70

0.41
0.59
0.70

0.49
0.45
0.83

Self
Self
Self

Llama-2
GPT-3.5
GPT-4

0.91
0.36
1.02

0.97
0.33
1.05

0.29
−0.17
0.62

0.62
0.15
0.68

0.70
0.16
0.84

Random
Random
Random

Llama-2
GPT-3.5
GPT-4

0.35
0.20
0.32

0.32
0.12
0.36

0.15
0.10
−0.13

0.60
0.28
0.51

0.35
0.17
0.26

Table 1: Human evaluations. The expert-written responses are grayed as a reference. The highest column values are bolded.
Highest values amongst LLMs are highlighted. Two rows are highlighted if they are not statistically different from each other
with a two-sided t-test.

gpt-3.5-turbo, and llama-2-70b-chat (Touvron et al., 2023) in a 0-shot setting on the test
set. During our preliminary experiments, we also
evaluated Falcon-40b-Instruct (Almazrouei et al.,
2023), Flan-T5 (large) (Chung et al., 2022), the
goal-directed dialog model GODEL (large) (Peng
et al., 2022) zero-shot and few-shot. We also
finetuned Flan-T5 and GODEL. However, we
found the models’ responses to be very poor upon
manual inspection or evaluated as much worse in
human evaluations than the other three models.
Therefore, we have omitted their results from the
paper. We use greedy decoding for all models.
5.2

Task Setup

We evaluate the model responses under different
decision-making conditions. The model prompts
are in Appendix D; each prompt includes instructions to respond in a useful and caring way.
1. No decision-making: Models directly respond,
cr ∼ p(cr |ch ). This condition is compared
against models with the Bridge decisionmaking framework.
2. Expert decision-making: Models generate with the expert’s decisions, cr ∼
p(cr |ch , e, zwhat , zwhy ).
3. Self decision-making: Models make their
own decisions, then generate responses based
model , z model ).
on them, cr ∼ p(cr |ch , emodel , zwhat
why
We compare the models’ decisions to the experts’ as well as the impact of the decisions

on the response quality.
4. Random decision-making: We randomly select decisions. We can determine the importance of context-sensitive decisions with this
condition.

6

Evaluation

6.1

Human evaluation of response quality.

We measure the extent to which the generated responses improve over the original tutors’ responses.
We recruit teachers through Prolific (identified
through Prolific’s screening criteria) to perform
pairwise comparisons between the tutor response
and a response generated by the expert or one of the
12 models. A random set of 40 pairs per model is
evaluated by 3 annotators each, who are blind to the
source of the responses. Raters evaluate the pairs
along four dimensions. The first two are usefulness
and care, as these have been identified as key qualities of effective remediation in prior work (Roorda
et al., 2011; Pianta, 2016; Robinson, 2022). The
third is human-soundingness; our preliminary analysis indicated that low learning outcomes strongly
correlated with whether the student was distracted
by whether their tutor was human during their tutoring session. Given that the tutoring is chat-based,
we include this as another dimension for measuring effectiveness. Finally, we ask the raters which
responses they prefer using, if they were the tutor.
Each dimension is rated on a 5-point Likert scale.
We convert the ratings to integers between -2 and 2:

(a) Expert (entropy: 6.00)

(b) gpt-4 (entropy: 3.37)

(c) gpt-3.5-turbo (entropy: 3.42)

(d) llama-2-70b-instruct (entropy: 3.37)

Figure 2: Expert decision-making paths are diverse whereas LLM’s are less diverse. The entropy of decision
paths is shown in the subcaption: The experts’ paths have higher entropy and thus are more diverse than those of the
LLMs. The red left column is Step A’s error decision; green middle column is Step B’s strategy decision; and blue
right column is Step C’s intention decision.

-2 indicates the rater much more prefers the original
tutor’s response and 2 for the alternative response.
Please refer to Appendix E for more information
on the human evaluation setup.
6.2

Lexical analysis and qualitative examples.

We perform a lexical analysis to understand the linguistic differences caused by the expert’s decisionmaking model. We compute the log odds ratio,
latent Dirichlet prior, measure defined in Monroe
et al. (2008) to estimate the distinctiveness of a bigram appearing in a response source. We consider
the response sources to be from GPT4 in all four
decision-making conditions listed in Section 5.2;
please refer to Appendix F for additional lexical
analysis. We pre-process the data using Python’s
NLTK package for tokenization and lowercasing,
and discard stop words and non-alphanumeric tokens (Bird et al., 2009). We use the Gensim Phrases
Python package to retrieve frequent bigrams in the
dataset (Rehurek and Sojka, 2011).

7

Results

7.1

Human evaluations of response quality.

Table 1 summarizes the results. Notably, there is a
large gap between the experts and models in the
no decision-making condition (up to 2.6x better
overall). Even though models in the no decisionmaking condition consistently outperform the original tutor responses (indicated by the positive val-

ues) on most dimensions, the gap in response quality may indicate the pedagogical knowledge gap
between experts and LLMs.
We observe that the expert decision-making
condition outperforms the no decision-making
condition, particularly on “prefer” (+76% on
gpt-4) and “useful” (+80% on gpt-4). The improvement in overall score is statistically significant for all models under a two-tailed t-test (p <
0.05). Surprisingly, the expert decision-making
condition for llama-2 and gpt-3.5-turbo does
not improve on “care”. We attribute this to the
challenges in generating responses that are both
technically instructive (“useful”) and emotionally
supportive (“care”) for the student.
How well can models self-improve by selecting
their own decisions? llama-2 and gpt-4 in the
self decision-making condition significantly outperform their no decision-making counterparts
on “prefer” and “useful” (p < 0.05, up to +95%).
However, this is not the case for gpt-3.5-turbo
with self decision-making. We hypothesize this is
due to its poor decisions and confirm this in Figure 2. Figure 2 illustrates the decision paths from
the experts and the LLMs in self decision-making
on the test examples and reports the path entropy.
The width is the proportion of error types that is
subsequently treated with which strategy and with
which intention. gpt-3.5-turbo overwhelmingly
corrects the student’s mistake whereas the other
models rely on other strategies. This suggests that

None + GPT4

Expert + GPT4

GPT4 + GPT4

Random +GPT4

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

lets_closer
closer_look
effort_lets
appreciate_effort
correct_solution
look_problem
great_effort
lets_steps
need_help
let_know

2.76
2.68
2.55
2.29
2.19
2.18
1.62
1.55
1.55
1.55

steps_took
review_concept
understand_concept
help_understand
explain_steps
took_arrive
lets_step
better_understand
ones_place
number_sides

2.04
1.66
1.56
1.56
1.56
1.56
1.51
1.31
1.31
1.31

can_explain
explain_arrived
arrived_answer
arrived_number
are_sure
sure_that
correct_remember
and_long
digit_answer
answer_step

4.98
4.78
4.2
2.19
2.19
2.19
1.38
1.38
1.38
1.38

good_try
start_remember
thats_right
try_again
thats _good
lets_break
glasses_water
for_example
times_equal
represents_glasses

1.82
1.58
1.57
1.54
1.43
1.37
1.3
1.3
1.3
1.29

Table 2: Top 10 bigrams. GPT4 with expert- or self decision-making engages more with the student’s problemsolving process, by asking the student for explanations and their reasoning process. GPT4 with no and random
decision-making engages superficially with the student’s answer, by acknowledging their attempt or prompting them
to try again without further guidance.
Lesson Topic

Addition and Subtraction Within 100

Context (ch )

Novice: We need to subtract 6 from 15.
Student: oh okay...
Novice: What is is value of 15 - 6?
Student: it is 11?

Expert

Ah, almost! Here’s how we can know for sure. We start at 15 and we need to go down 6.
So let’s count down 6 numbers from 15. 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9.

Novice

That was a good effort.

GPT4 (None)

That’s correct! Great job, 15 - 6 equals 11. Keep up the good work!

GPT4 (Expert)

That’s close, but let’s try again. If we break down 15 into 10 and 5, we can subtract 6
from 10 first, which gives us 4. Then, add the 5 back, so 4 + 5 = 9. So, 15 - 6 = 9.

GPT4 (Self)

Are you sure about that? Let’s try subtracting 6 from 15 again.

GPT4 (Random)

Actually, the correct answer is 9.

Table 3: Response example. The Expert and GPT4 with expert decision-making engage with the problem-solving
process, whereas the other settings engage with the student’s answer, such as giving away the answer or
acknowledging the student’s attempt. In this example, GPT4 (None) also responds with the incorrect answer.

directly correcting the student’s mistake is not
always a good decision and that poor decisions
reinforce poor response quality.

with no decision-making (p < 0.05 for gpt-4,
llama-2).

Figure 2 reveals another interesting observation:
Experts exhibit diverse decision paths, whereas
LLMs do not. Our work provides additional evidence of homogenization effects in LLMs (Padmakumar and He, 2023). This prompts another
question: Does deliberate decision-making matter, or could we randomly pick decisions to encourage similar diversity? Deliberate decisions do
matter: Models with random decision-making
perform significantly worse than their expert
decision-making condition on the “overall” score
(p < 0.05), sometimes even worse than models

Table 2 highlights the differences in word usage
across the GPT4 decision-making conditions, and
Table 3 shows an example of the word usage in
context. Table 2 suggests that the high human
evaluations for GPT4 with expert or self decisionmaking are because they engage more with the
problem-solving process (e.g.,, “explain_steps”).
The lowly evaluated settings—GPT4 with no or
random decision-making—weakly engage with the
problem-solving process, only acknowledging the
student’s effort (e.g., “appreciate_effort” in Table 2)
or even giving away the answer (e.g.,, “Actually,

7.2

Lexical Analysis

the correct answer is 9” in Table 3). Altogether,
these results suggest that the effective use of the
decision-making model guides LLMs to support
the student’s problem-solving process, rather than
engage superficially with the student’s final answer.

8

Discussion & Conclusion

Our work presents several contributions for bridging the expert-novice gap and improving the learning experience at scale. First, we develop Bridge,
which leverages cognitive task analysis to translate
an expert’s latent thought process into a decisionmaking framework. We apply this to the task of remediating mistakes because they are prime learning
opportunities to correct misunderstandings hindering learning. Second, we contribute a rich dataset
with expert annotations on their decisions and responses. The dataset comes from a tutoring program that works with a majority of Title I schools,
and is a valuable resource for providing equitable,
high-quality learning experiences. Finally, we perform a thorough evaluation and lexical analysis of
experts, novices and LLMs. We demonstrate that
expert-guided decision-making and strategic decision selection are critical to improving remediation
quality. Novices and LLMs alone use passive remediation language and do not engage with the
student’s error traces. Our findings indicate promising avenues for scaling high-quality tutoring with
expert-guided decision-making. For example, the
tutor can make the decisions and the LLM generates an initial response that is further edited by tutor.
Altogether, our work shows promising results of an
expert-guided human-LLM approach that makes
strides towards bridging the knowledge gap.

9

Limitations and Future Work

While our work provides a useful starting point for
leveraging expert decision-making models at scale
and remediating student mistakes, there are limitations to our work. Addressing these limitations
will be an important area for future research.
Collapsing expert thought processes. LLMs
and novices might still receive incomplete information or maintain misconceptions when following the expert’s decision-making process, because the process distills the expert’s knowledge.
Nonetheless, we hope Bridge and the accompanying dataset provide a useful foundation for leveraging expert knowledge at scale.

Experts. We work with a handful of experts
based on the U.S., which is not representative of experienced teaching backgrounds from other countries or cultures. We hope that future work can
build on Bridge and adapt the decision-making
models to fit to other expert pools.
Access to questions. In some cases, the chat transcripts do not include the question the tutor and
the student are working on together. This is because the questions are sometimes displayed on
a shared whiteboard, and not posted in the chat.
Even though our dataset includes annotations for
when there’s not enough context, future work could
improve upon our analysis by always including information about the question.
Expanding to other subjects. Our dataset and
benchmark currently focuses on mathematics. The
remediation process for mathematics and the decision options may not directly transfer to other
subjects, although they may serve as a good starting point for remediating student mistakes in other
domains.
Evaluation with students. Our human evaluations are currently limited to the teacher’s perspective. However, ultimately, the effectiveness of the
responses relies on how students receive and interpret them, and whether these interactions positively impact their learning outcomes. To address
this limitation, future research should work towards
evaluating this method with students. This is important as previous studies like Wentzel (2022) highlight the potential disparity between teachers and
students in determining what responses are more
caring or useful.

Ethics Statement
We recognize that our research on the integration
of large language models (LLMs) in education ventures into a less explored territory of NLP with
numerous ethical considerations. LLMs open up
new possibilities for enhancing the quality of human education, however there are several ethical
considerations we actively took into consideration
while performing this work. We hope that these
serve as guidelines for responsible practices, and
hope that future work does the same.
First is the privacy of both students and tutors.
We obtained approval from the tutoring program
for repurposing the data for our dataset. We handled all data with strict confidentiality, adhering to

best practices in data anonymization and storage
security.
Furthermore, we are committed to promoting
equity and inclusivity in education. The compensation provided to the experienced math teachers
involved in our benchmarking process was set at
a significantly higher rate, reflecting our recognition of their invaluable contributions and domain
expertise. By compensating teachers fairly, we aim
to foster a culture of respect, collaboration, and
mutual support within the NLP and education community.
Finally, we are committed to the responsible use
of our research findings. We encourage the adoption of our benchmark and methodologies by the research community, with the understanding that the
ultimate goal is to improve educational outcomes
for all students and provide support to educators.
We actively promote transparency, openness, and
collaboration to drive further advancements in the
field of natural language processing (NLP) for education.

Acknowledgements
We’d like to thank Jiang Wu, Hannah Shuchhardt,
and two anonymous individuals for their help and
feedback on our work; the Stanford NLP group,
Caleb Ziems, Joy He-Yueya, Gabriel Poesia, Myra
Cheng, Kristina Gligorić, Ali Malik and Roma Patel for their feedback on the paper; Jesse Mu for
pointing us to Sankey diagrams; and IMK for the
Bridge inspiration.

References

with the natural language toolkit. " O’Reilly Media,
Inc.".
Jo Boaler. 2013. Ability and mathematics: The mindset
revolution that is reshaping education. Forum.
John Seely Brown and Richard R Burton. 1978. Diagnostic models for procedural bugs in basic mathematical skills. Cognitive science, 2(2):155–192.
Andrew Caines, Helen Yannakoudakis, Helena Edmondson, Helen Allen, Pascual Pérez-Paredes, Bill Byrne,
and Paula Buttery. 2020. The teacher-student chatroom corpus. In Proceedings of the 9th Workshop
on NLP for Computer Assisted Language Learning,
pages 10–20.
Thomas P Carpenter, Elizabeth Fennema, M Loef
Franke, Linda Levi, and Susan B Empson. 1999.
Children’s mathematics. Cognitively Guided, 8.
Thomas P Carpenter, Megan Loef Franke, and Linda
Levi. 2003. Thinking mathematically. Portsmouth,
NH: Heinemann.
CAST. 2018.
Universal Design for Learning
Guidelines
version
2.2.
Retrieved
from http://udlguidelines.cast.org.
https:
//udlguidelines.cast.org/. [Online; accessed
4-June-2023].
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret
Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, Albert Webson, Shixiang Shane Gu, Zhuyun Dai,
Mirac Suzgun, Xinyun Chen, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Alex Castro-Ros, Marie Pellat, Kevin Robinson,
Dasha Valter, Sharan Narang, Gaurav Mishra, Adams
Yu, Vincent Zhao, Yanping Huang, Andrew Dai,
Hongkun Yu, Slav Petrov, Ed H. Chi, Jeff Dean, Jacob Devlin, Adam Roberts, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le,
and Jason Wei. 2022. Scaling instruction-finetuned
language models.

National Student Support Accelerator. 2022. Using the
American Rescue Plan Act Funding For High-Impact
Tutoring. https://studentsupportaccelerator.
org/briefs/using-american-rescue-plan.
[Online; accessed 4-June-2023].

Richard E Clark, David F Feldon, Jeroen JG Van Merrienboer, Kenneth A Yates, and Sean Early. 2008.
Cognitive task analysis. In Handbook of research on
educational communications and technology, pages
577–593. Routledge.

Ebtesam Almazrouei, Hamza Alobeidli, Abdulaziz Alshamsi, Alessandro Cappelli, Ruxandra Cojocaru,
Merouane Debbah, Etienne Goffinet, Daniel Heslow, Julien Launay, Quentin Malartic, Badreddine
Noune, Baptiste Pannier, and Guilherme Penedo.
2023. Falcon-40B: an open large language model
with state-of-the-art performance.

Nancy J Cooke. 1999. Knowledge elicitation. Handbook of applied cognition, pages 479–509.

Honi Joyce Bamberger, Christine Oberdorf, and Karren
Schultz-Ferrell. 2010. Math misconceptions: PreKgrade 5: From misunderstanding to deep understanding. Heinemann.
Steven Bird, Ewan Klein, and Edward Loper. 2009. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text

Dorottya Demszky and Jing Liu. 2023. M-powering
teachers: Natural language processing powered feedback improves 1:1 instruction and student outcomes.
L@S ’23: Proceedings of the Tenth ACM Conference
on Learning @ Scale.
Dorottya Demszky, Jing Liu, Heather Hill, Dan Jurafsky,
and Chris Piech. 2023. Can automated feedback
improve teachers’ uptake of student ideas? evidence
from a randomized controlled trial in a large-scale
online course. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis.

P. J. Donnelly, N. Blanchard, A. M. Olney, S. Kelly,
M. Nystrand, and S. K. D’Mello. 2017. Words matter: Automatic detection of teacher questions in live
classroom discourse using linguistics, acoustics and
context. 218–227. Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference on - LAK ’17.
Junyi Du, He Jiang, Jiaming Shen, and Xiang Ren. 2019.
Eliciting knowledge from experts: Automatic transcript parsing for cognitive task analysis. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 4280–4291.
J Al Easley and Russell E Zwoyer. 1975. Teaching by
listening-toward a new day in math classes. Contemporary Education, 47(1):19.
Susan E Embretson and Steven P Reise. 2013. Item
response theory. Psychology Press.
Simon Frieder, Luca Pinchetti, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas Lukasiewicz,
Philipp Christian Petersen, Alexis Chevalier, and
Julius Berner. 2023. Mathematical capabilities of
chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13867.
Roland G Fryer Jr and Meghan Howard-Noveck. 2020.
High-dosage tutoring and reading achievement: evidence from new york city. Journal of Labor Economics, 38(2):421–452.
Robert M Gagne. 1962. The acquisition of knowledge.
Psychological review, 69(4):355.
Robert M Gagne. 1968. Presidential address of division
15 learning hierarchies. Educational psychologist,
6(1):1–9.
Robert M Gagne and Karen L Medsker. 1996. The
conditions of learning: Training applications.
Robert Glaser and Anthony J Nitko. 1970. Measurement in learning and instruction.
Arthur C Graesser, Shulan Lu, George Tanner Jackson, Heather Hite Mitchell, Mathew Ventura, Andrew Olney, and Max M Louwerse. 2004. Autotutor:
A tutor with dialogue in natural language. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
36:180–192.
Ellen P Hall, Sherrie P Gott, and Robert Alan Pokorny.
1995. A procedural guide to cognitive task analysis:
The PARI methodology. Armstrong Laboratory, Air
Force Materiel Command.
Kunal Handa, Margaret Clapper, Jessica Boyle, Rose E
Wang, Diyi Yang, David S Yeager, and Dorottya
Demszky. 2023. "mistakes help us grow": Facilitating and evaluating growth mindset supportive language in classrooms.
Sebastian Hobert and Raphael Meyer von Wolff. 2019.
Say hello to your new automated tutor–a structured literature review on pedagogical conversational
agents.

Jennifer Jacobs, Karla Scornavacco, Charis Harty, Abhijit Suresh, Vivian Lai, and Tamara Sumner. 2022.
Promoting rich discussions in mathematics classrooms: Using personalized, automated feedback to
support reflection and instructional change. Teaching
and Teacher Education, 112:103631.
E. Jensen, M. Dale, P. J. Donnelly, C. Stone, S. Kelly,
A. Godley, and S. K. D’Mello. 2020. Toward automated feedback on teacher discourse to enhance
teacher learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–13.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan
Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea
Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of hallucination in natural language generation. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(12):1–38.
S. Kelly, A. M. Olney, P. Donnelly, M. Nystrand, and
S. K. D’Mello. 2018. Automatically measuring question authenticity in real-world classrooms. Educational Researcher, 47:7.
Sean Kelly, Robert Bringe, Esteban Aucejo, and
Jane Cooley Fruehwirth. 2020. Using global observation protocols to inform research on teaching
effectiveness and school improvement: Strengths
and emerging limitations. Education Policy Analysis Archives, 28:62–62.
Khan Academy. 2023. Harnessing GPT-4 so that
all students benefit. A nonprofit approach for
equal access. https://blog.khanacademy.org/
harnessing-ai-so-that-all-students
-benefit-a-nonprofit-approach-for-equal
-access. [Online; accessed 4-June-2024].
Gary Klein. 2008. Naturalistic decision making. Human factors, 50(3):456–460.
Gary Klein. 2015. A naturalistic decision making perspective on studying intuitive decision making. Journal of applied research in memory and cognition,
4(3):164–168.
M. A. Kraft, D. Blazar, and D. Hogan. 2018. The effect
of teacher coaching on instruction and achievement:
A meta-analysis of the causal evidence. Review of
Educational Research, 88(4):547–588.
Robin Louise Lee. 2004. The impact of cognitive task
analysis on performance: A meta-analysis of comparative studies. University of Southern California.
Mark R Lepper and Maria Woolverton. 2002. The wisdom of practice: Lessons learned from the study
of highly effective tutors. In Improving academic
achievement, pages 135–158. Elsevier.
Frank K Lester. 2007. Second handbook of research on
mathematics teaching and learning: A project of the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. IAP.

MiniChain Library. 2023.
MiniChain Library.
https://github.com/srush/minichain#
typed-prompts. [Online; accessed 4-June-2024].
Diane Litman. 2016. Natural language processing for
enhancing teaching and learning. In Proceedings of
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30.
Deborah Loewenberg Ball and Francesca M Forzani.
2009. The work of teaching and the challenge for
teacher education. Journal of teacher education,
60(5):497–511.
Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan Chowdhury, Tanmay Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023a. Mathdial: A dialogue tutoring
dataset with rich pedagogical properties grounded in
math reasoning problems. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023,
pages 5602–5621.
Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Lingzhi Wang, Tanmay
Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya
Sachan. 2023b. Opportunities and challenges in neural dialog tutoring. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 2357–2372.
Julia M Markel, Steven G Opferman, James A Landay, and Chris Piech. 2023. Gpteach: Interactive ta
training with gpt-based students. In Proceedings of
the tenth acm conference on learning@ scale, pages
226–236.
Ian McKenzie. 2023. Inverse Scaling Prize: First Round
Winners. https://irmckenzie.co.uk/round1#:
~:text=model%20should%20answer.-,Using%
20newlines,-We%20saw%20many.
[Online; accessed 4-June-2024].
Burt L Monroe, Michael P Colaresi, and Kevin M Quinn.
2008. Fightin’words: Lexical feature selection and
evaluation for identifying the content of political conflict. Political Analysis, 16(4):372–403.
Andre Nickow, Philip Oreopoulos, and Vincent Quan.
2020. The impressive effects of tutoring on prek-12
learning: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
the experimental evidence.
U.S. Department of Education. 2021.
Strategies for Using American Rescue Plan Funding
to Address the Impact of Lost Instructional
Time.
https://www2.ed.gov/documents/
coronavirus/lost-instructional-time.pdf.
[Online; accessed 4-June-2023].
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Vishakh Padmakumar and He He. 2023. Does writing with language models reduce content diversity?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05196.

Baolin Peng, Michel Galley, Pengcheng He, Chris
Brockett, Lars Liden, Elnaz Nouri, Zhou Yu, Bill
Dolan, and Jianfeng Gao. 2022. Godel: Large-scale
pre-training for goal-directed dialog. arXiv.
Robert C Pianta. 2016. Teacher–student interactions:
Measurement, impacts, improvement, and policy.
Policy insights from the behavioral and brain sciences, 3(1):98–105.
Robert C Pianta, Bridget Hamre, and Megan Stuhlman.
2003. Relationships between teachers and children.
Hendrik Radatz. 1980. Students’ errors in the mathematical learning process: a survey. For the learning
of Mathematics, 1(1):16–20.
Anna N Rafferty, Emma Brunskill, Thomas L Griffiths,
and Patrick Shafto. 2016. Faster teaching via pomdp
planning. Cognitive science, 40(6):1290–1332.
Radim Rehurek and Petr Sojka. 2011. Gensim–python
framework for vector space modelling. NLP Centre,
Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, Brno,
Czech Republic, 3(2):2.
Lauren B Resnick, Margaret C Wang, and Jerome Kaplan. 1973. Task analysis in curriculum design: A
hierarchically sequenced introductory mathematics
curriculum 1. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis,
6(4):679–709.
Paul J Riccomini. 2005. Identification and remediation
of systematic error patterns in subtraction. Learning
Disability Quarterly, 28(3):233–242.
Carly D Robinson. 2022. A framework for motivating
teacher-student relationships. Educational Psychology Review, 34(4):2061–2094.
Carly D Robinson and Susanna Loeb. 2021. Highimpact tutoring: State of the research and priorities
for future learning. National Student Support Accelerator, 21(284):1–53.
Debora L Roorda, Helma MY Koomen, Jantine L Spilt,
and Frans J Oort. 2011. The influence of affective teacher–student relationships on students’ school
engagement and achievement: A meta-analytic approach. Review of educational research, 81(4):493–
529.
Vasile Rus, Sidney D’Mello, Xiangen Hu, and Arthur
Graesser. 2013. Recent advances in conversational
intelligent tutoring systems. AI magazine, 34(3):42–
54.
Joan M Ryder and Richard E Redding. 1993. Integrating cognitive task analysis into instructional systems
development. Educational Technology Research and
Development, 41(2):75–96.
B. Samei, A. M. Olney, S. Kelly, M. Nystrand,
S. D’Mello, N. Blanchard, X. Sun, M. Glaus, and
A. Graesser. 2014. Domain independent assessment
of dialogic properties of classroom discourse.

Lauren C Schnepper and Leah P McCoy. 2013. Analysis of misconceptions in high school mathematics.
Networks: An Online Journal for Teacher Research,
15(1):625–625.

Jeroen JG Van Merriënboer. 1997. Training complex
cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design model for technical training. Educational Technology.

Thomas L Seamster, Richard E Redding, John R Cannon, Joan M Ryder, and Janine A Purcell. 1993. Cognitive task analysis of expertise in air traffic control. The international journal of aviation psychology, 3(4):257–283.

Lev Semenovich Vygotsky and Michael Cole. 1978.
Mind in society: Development of higher psychological processes. Harvard university press.

Ashish Sharma, Kevin Rushton, Inna Lin, David Wadden, Khendra Lucas, Adam Miner, Theresa Nguyen,
and Tim Althoff. 2023. Cognitive reframing of negative thoughts through human-language model interaction. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 9977–10000, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Meghan Shaughnessy, Rosalie DeFino, Erin Pfaff, and
Merrie Blunk. 2021. I think i made a mistake: How
do prospective teachers elicit the thinking of a student
who has made a mistake? Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 24:335–359.
Natasha Singer. 2023. In classrooms, teachers put a.i.
tutoring bots to the test.
Katherine Stasaski, Kimberly Kao, and Marti A Hearst.
2020. Cima: A large open access dialogue dataset for
tutoring. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Workshop
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational
Applications, pages 52–64.
Greg P Stefanich and Teri Rokusek. 1992. An analysis
of computational errors in the use of division algorithms by fourth-grade students. School Science and
Mathematics, 92(4):201.
Marcy Stein, Diane Kinder, Jerry Silbert, and Douglas W Carnine. 2005. Designing effective mathematics instruction: A direct instruction approach.
Pearson.
Maura E Sullivan, Kenneth A Yates, Kenji Inaba, Lydia Lam, and Richard E Clark. 2014. The use of
cognitive task analysis to reveal the instructional limitations of experts in the teaching of procedural skills.
Academic Medicine, 89(5):811–816.
Anaïs Tack and Chris Piech. 2022. The ai teacher test:
Measuring the pedagogical ability of blender and gpt3 in educational dialogues. In Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on Educational Data
Mining, page 522.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288.

Rose Wang and Dorottya Demszky. 2023. Is chatgpt
a good teacher coach? measuring zero-shot performance for scoring and providing actionable insights
on classroom instruction. In 18th Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications.
Rose Wang, Pawan Wirawarn, Noah Goodman, and
Dorottya Demszky. 2023. Sight: A large annotated
dataset on student insights gathered from higher education transcripts. In Proceedings of Innovative Use
of NLP for Building Educational Applications.
Rose E Wang, Sarah A Wu, James A Evans, Joshua B
Tenenbaum, David C Parkes, and Max KleimanWeiner. 2020. Too many cooks: Coordinating multiagent collaboration through inverse planning.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:24824–24837.
Kathryn R Wentzel. 1997. Student motivation in middle
school: The role of perceived pedagogical caring.
Journal of educational psychology, 89(3):411.
Kathryn R Wentzel. 2022. Does anybody care? conceptualization and measurement within the contexts of
teacher-student and peer relationships. Educational
Psychology Review, pages 1–36.
James V Wertsch. 1985. Vygotsky and the social formation of mind. Harvard university press.
Richard T White. 1973. Research into learning hierarchies. Review of Educational Research, 43(3):361–
375.
Sandra K Wilcox and Ronald S Zielinski. 1997. Implementing the assessment standards for school mathematics: Using the assessment of students’ learning to reshape teaching. The Mathematics Teacher,
90(3):223–229.
Caleb Ziems, William Held, Omar Shaikh, Jiaao Chen,
Zhehao Zhang, and Diyi Yang. 2023. Can large language models transform computational social science? arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03514.
Caroline E Zsambok and Gary Klein. 2014. Naturalistic
decision making. Psychology Press.

A

Developing Bridge

This section details how we developed the Bridge
Benchmark in collaboration with the math teachers.
The design objective of the benchmark is to capture
the teachers’ thought process when addressing student mistakes. We developed the taxonomy closely
with two of the four teachers. We compensated
them at $50/hour. We met with them on a weekly
to biweekly basis. During the preliminary stages of
this work, we provided the teachers examples of the
conversations and asked them to directly revise the
tutor’s responses. For the first few weeks, we met
on a weekly basis where a co-author presented the
teachers about 20 conversation examples and the
teachers worked on the examples asynchronously.
During the meetings, the teachers and co-author
discussed the teachers’ approaches to the setting.
After four meetings, themes started to emerge in
the types of approaches the teachers used. For instance, the teachers often made hypotheses about
the student’s thought process, which gave rise to
the error category. This illustrated that educators
possess a mental model of what the student is doing
and employ various probing techniques to confirm
or refute their hypotheses. The diverse ways in
which the teachers probed and engaged with the
students led to the identification of different strategies. We further categorized these strategies based
on their intentions, reflecting the potential consequences they might have on the student’s learning
process.
We then created a taxonomy of these approaches
(the decision options), and edited the taxonomy
through more iterations of task attempts and discussion. These edits included expanding the set of categories, removing irrelevant categories, separating
categories into different groups (e.g., the separation
of student error from the teacher’s strategies) and
re-structuring the order of the tasks. The taxonomy
was finalized once both teachers and the co-authors
were satisfied with how naturally the benchmark
could be used and with the benchmark’s coverage.

B

Examples of Decision Options

This section provides examples for each of decision option. It is split by error type, strategy, and
intention.
B.1

Student Error Types

guess: The student does not seem to understand
or guessed the answer. This error type is charac-

terized by expressions of uncertainty or answers
that do not seem related to the problem, the options or the target answer. An example of this is
the following conversation snippet on the topic of
“Addition and subtraction within 100”:
tutor: We need to subtract 6 from 15.
student: oh okay...
tutor: What is the value of 15 - 6?
student: it is 11?
This example could be labeled as the student guessing because they express uncertainty in their answer
(“it is 11?”)
misinterpret: The student misinterpreted
the question. This error type is characterized by
answers that arise from a misunderstanding of the
question being asked. Students may mistakenly
address a subtly different question, leading to an
incorrect response. For example, a common manifestation of this error is the reversal of number orderings, such as interpreting "2 divided by 6" as "6
divided by 2." An example of this is the following
conversation snippet on the topic of “Converting
Units of Measure”:
student: sorry for the j that I tipe.
tutor: Not an issue, [STUDENT].
tutor: How many times 1000 will goes into 7000?
student: it cant
This example could be labeled as the student misinterpreting because the student might have read the
question as the reverse question (e.g., "How many
times can 7000 go into 1000?") because they say
that the number cannot go into the other number.
careless: The student made a careless mistake. This error type is characterized by answers
that appear to utilize the correct mathematical operation but contain a small numerical mistake, resulting in an answer that is slightly off. It reflects
a lack of careful attention to detail or a minor
computational error in an otherwise sound solution approach. An example of this is the following
conversation snippet on the topic of “Volume of
Rectangular Prisms”:
tutor: Again, we have to multiply the value of 6
with 20.
student: so it is 110
tutor: So, what is the value of 20 times 6?
student: 110
This example could be labelled as the student making a careless mistake. The student seems capable
of multiplying (their answer is larger than 100) and
does not mistake the operation (e.g., they multiply,
and do not add the numbers). They make a mi-

nor mistake in the calculation (110 instead of 120),
which suggests that they made a careless mistake.
right-idea: The student has the right idea,
but is not quite there. This error type is characterized by situations where the student demonstrates
a general understanding of the underlying concept
or approach but falls short of executing or reaching
the correct solution. For example, a student may
recognize that multiplication is required to compute areas but may struggle with applying it to a
specific problem. An example of this is the following conversation snippet on the topic of “Area”:
tutor: Please check the question once.
tutor: The factors are 24 and 86.
tutor: What is the formula for finding the area of a
rectangle?
student: multiplying
tutor: So, what is the value of 20 times 6?
student: 110
This example could be labelled as the student having the right idea, but isn’t quite there. The student
seems to understand what operation is need for calculating the area, but their language is not precise
(e.g., they don’t mention ’width’ or ’length’). This
suggests that they might not have a clear understanding of how to apply the concept.
imprecise: The student’s answer is not precise enough or the tutor is being too picky about
the form of the student’s answer. This error
type is characterized by student answers that lacks
the necessary level of precision or when the tutor places excessive emphasis on the specific form
of the student’s response. An example of this is
the following conversation snippet on the topic of
“Concept of Area”:
student: yes
tutor: Okay!
tutor: What should he measure?
student: the dimensional area
In this example, the tutor flags the student’s answer
as incorrect, and says that the correct answer is
“area.” This example could be labelled by this error
because the student either is imprecise with their
language and/or the tutor is being too strict about
the use of term.
not-sure: Not sure, but I’m going to try to
diagnose the student. This option is used if the
teacher is not sure why the student made the mistake from the context provided. We encourage
the teachers to use the provided lesson topic and
their teaching experience with students to determine what the mistake is, and use this error type

sparingly.
N/A: None of the above, I have a different description. This option is used of none of the other
options reflect the error type. Similar to not-sure,
we encourage teachers to use this error type sparingly.
B.2

Response Strategies and Intentions

Below are examples of response strategies and intentions that the teachers selected. We provide
the lesson topic to each example. The original
tutor’s messages are marked with tutor, and the
students’ with student. Note that in the annotation
setup, we allow the teachers to simulate the student’s response in order for the teachers to fully
complete their strategy. Therefore, the examples
here will include the teacher’s simulated response
for the student. The teacher’s response is marked
with teacher, and the simulated student messages
are marked with student (simulated). The teachers selected strategies that they used for their own
response—the strategies are not descriptions of
what the tutor did.
As a reminder, the categories of response strategies are:
• Explain a concept
• Ask a question
• Provide a hint
• Provide a strategy
• Provide a worked example
• Provide a worked example
• Provide a minor correction
• Provide a similar problem
• Simplify the question
• Affirm the correct answer
• Encourage the student
• Other
The categories of intentions are:
• Motivate the student
• Get the student to elaborate their answer
• Correct the student’s mistake

• Hint at the student’s mistake
• Clarify a student’s misunderstanding
• Help the student understand the lesson topic
or solution strategy
• Diagnose the student’s mistake
• Support the student in their thinking or
problem-solving
• Explain the student’s mistake (e.g., what is
wrong in their answer or why is it incorrect)
• Signal to the student that they have solved or
not solved the problem
• Other (use sparingly).
Here are some example of strategies used, and
their paired intention.
Explain a concept (Intention: Correct the student’s mistake) Lesson: Order of Operations
tutor: You earn one point for your good beginning.
tutor: That was a good try.
tutor: What is the value of 33 ?
student: 9
teacher: When we see an exponent, we multiply
the number by itself however much the exponent
is. Is this example, that is 3 times 3 times 3. What
is that value?
student (simulated): 27
teacher: Correct. 3 raised to the third power is
3 times 3 times 3, which is 27. Let’s try another
one.",
Ask a question (Intention: Correct the
student’s mistake) Lesson: Identify Unit Rate
student: ok
tutor: We can find the unit rate by selecting one
point on the line and writing down the coordinates.
tutor: What is the coordinate of one point on the
line?
student: 300
teacher: Great try! Remember that for coordinates
we need an x and a y value. Which one is 300?
student (simulated): x
teacher: Great job - now what about y?
Provide a hint (Intention: Hint at the student’s
mistake) Lesson: Multiplying Multi-Digit by
One-Digit Numbers
tutor: Give it your best shot.

tutor: Good going!
tutor: Is that your final answer?
student: yes
teacher: Great try! Remember when multiplying
that we need to carry the tens place
student (simulated): o yah. So I carry the 2?
teacher: Exactly!
Provide a strategy (Intention: Support the
student in their thinking or problem-solving)
Lesson: Metric Conversions and Word Problems
student: "yes i understand
tutor: Let’s move on to the next question.
tutor: How many milliliters are in one liter?
student: is that a 20
teacher: Great try! Try using the prefixes to help
you. Milli means thousand.
student (simulated): oh then thousand?
teacher: "Yes! There are 1000 milliliters in a liter.
Provide a worked example (Intention: Help the
student understand the lesson topic or solution
strategy) Lesson: Understanding Multiplication
tutor: Go ahead and give your best.
student: c
tutor: Is that your final answer?
student: yes
teacher: That’s a great try! When we are multiplying, try to think of x groups of y and how many
that would leave you. For example, 3 times 5
would be 3 groups of 5 or 5 groups of 3, which is
15.
teacher: So, what would 2 times 4 be? student
(simulated): 8?
teacher: Great job!
Provide a minor correction (Intention: Support
the student in their thinking or problem-solving)
Lesson: Decomposing Figures
tutor: What is the area of the bottom rectangle?
tutor: That’s correct
tutor: What is the area of the top rectangle?
student: es 50
teacher: Ah, not quite. What is the length and the
width of the top rectangle?
student (simulated): 2 and 5
teacher: Yes. Do you remember how to get the
area of a rectangle?
student (simulated): we multiply
teacher: Yes, please multiply 2 x 5

student (simulated): 10
Provide a similar problem (Intention: Help the
student understand the lesson topic or solution
strategy) Lesson: Dividing Using Equations
tutor: Try to answer my question.
tutor: Okay, let me explain it to you.
tutor: What is the value of 5 times 2?
student: 5
teacher: Great try! 5 times 1 is 5. What about 5
times 2?
student (simulated): twice. so 10
teacher: Correct!
Simplify the question (Intention: Help the student understand the lesson topic or solution
strategy)
Affirm the correct answer (Intention: Signal to
the student that they have solved or not solved
the problem) Lesson: Shapes and Area
tutor: I was facing some technical glitch.
student: ya
tutor: What is area?
student: spase in side sompthing
teacher: Yes well done! Area is the 2D space
inside something
student (simulated): ok
teacher: Surface area is the area on the outside of
a 3D object

that outlined the allowable usage of the data to
improve instruction in collaboration with an educational agency. Following the FERPA guidelines, we were eligible to engage in secondary data
analysis with student data, which is what we did
for this study. This study falls under the research
team’s IRB for conducting research in collaboration with tutoring providers and school district (Protocol #XXXX - redacted due to anonymous submission).
C.2

Data Processing

Signalling Expressions for Student Mistakes The
following is the list of the signalling expressions
used by the tutor which we use to mark conversation segments where the student has made a mistake. To identify these segments, we first lowercase
all the conversation utterances, and check whether
the following expressions exactly occur in the conversation.
• “incorrect”
• “not quite”
• “bit off”
• “good try”
• “great try”
• “effort”
• “recheck”

Encourage the student (Intention: Motivate the
student) Lesson: Rounding
tutor: Here, the value of 6 in the given number is
more than 5.
tutor: So, we need to round the value 7.
tutor: Do you have any questions about that part?
student: millions
teacher: Ok, ask away!
student (simulated): why do we round up?
teacher: Becuase the 6 is greater than 5 (5 is the
cutoff)

C

Data Processing and Annotation

This section discusses how the initial dataset is
processed and how the dataset is annotated.
C.1

Data Use

The research team executed Data Use Agreements
with both the tutoring provider and school district

C.3

Annotation Quality Check

We perform quality checks before the teachers
started annotation. First, they are onboarded by
an author of this work through two meetings, each
meeting ranging between 30-60 minutes. After the
meeting, the teachers complete a sample of 20 problems similar to the ones in the final task. The teachers and author then meet again to walk through their
answers and check their understanding of each of
the taxonomy’s category options. The 20 sample
problems are not used for the dataset and are only
for onboarding purposes. After training, each item
took about 2 to 10 minutes for the teachers to complete.
C.4

Annotation Setup

Figure 3 shows the interface used by the teachers
for annotating the data in our dataset. Note that the
annotation interface allows teachers to simulate the

student’s response. We have this feature because
the teachers found that only responding on a single
turn was not sufficient for them to complete their
strategy of choice.

D

Prompts

This section contains information on the prompts
for gpt-4, gpt-3.5-turbo, and llama-2. We
found that we could use similar prompts for gpt-4
and gpt-3.5-turbo, however these prompts had
to adapted for llama-2 to mimic its training format2 . Unless otherwise noted, our prompt practices
follow a mix of works from NLP, education and
social sciences (McKenzie, 2023; Library, 2023;
Ziems et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). For generating the remediation response, we found it important
to add a length constraint to force the model to stick
to the short message styles of the tutor and student;
otherwise, the model responses would generally be
extremely long (up to 5 − 10× longer than the original tutor responses). Adding the length constraint
also prevented the model from simulating the rest
of the tutoring session. All the prompts include
context on the task at the start of the prompt, and
the constraints of outputting a JSON-formatted text
for the task at the end of the prompt.
D.1

No Decision-Making Condition

Models directly respond, cr ∼ p(cr |ch ). The
prompts for gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo are shown
in Figure 4. The prompt for llama-2 is shown in
Figure 5 where the formatting is slightly adapted.
D.2

Expert Decision-Making Condition

Models generate with the expert’s decisions, cr ∼
p(cr |ch , e, zwhat , zwhy ). The prompts for gpt-4
and gpt-3.5-turbo are shown in Figure 6. The
prompt for llama-2 is shown in Figure 7 where
the formatting is slightly adapted. The labels for
e, zwhat , zwhy come from our annotated dataset.
D.3

Self decision-making condition

LLMs make their own decisions, then
generate
responses
based
on
them,
model , z model ).
cr ∼ p(cr |ch , emodel , zwhat
Followwhy
ing the decision-making model, we first generate
the model’s decision on error emodel with prompts
in Figure 8 (for gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo) and
in Figure 9 (for llama-2). Then we generate
2
https://gpus.llm-utils.org/
llama-2-prompt-template/#notes,
https://
huggingface.co/blog/llama2#how-to-prompt-llama-2

the model’s decision on strategy and intenmodel , z model in Figure 10 (for gpt-4 and
tion zwhat
why
gpt-3.5-turbo) and in Figure 11 (for llama-2).
Finally, we use the previous response generation
prompts with decision-making to generate cr from
Section D.2.
D.4

Random Decision-Making Condition

We randomly select a decision for the error, strategy
and intention. Then, we use the previous response
generation prompts with decision-making to generate cr from Section D.2.

E

Human Evaluations

We describe the human evaluation setup, whose
results are reported in Section 7.1.
The human evaluations were run on Prolific. Our
prescreening criteria were that the participants have
to be located in the USA, have to be a teacher, their
fluent languages have to include English, and their
approval rating has to be at least 96%. We conduct the human evaluations on 40 items from each
model with 3 raters; 10 of these items were held to
be the same and the other 30 were randomly sampled. The 10 items are used to calculated the IRR
reported in the main tables. Each item consisted of
a pair of remediation responses, Response A and
Response B. One of the responses is the original
tutor’s response to the student’s mistake, and the
other response is the newly generated remediation
response (ie. the expert-written response in the
Human row, and the model-generated response in
the other rows). The ordering of the responses is always randomized. Each item is scored on a Likert
scale from -2 to 2 on four dimensions: usefulness,
care, human-soundingness, and preference. We
also provided a definition for each dimension.
Figure 12 shows an example of the evaluation
interface. Specifically, the phrasing for each dimension was:
Which response is more useful?
Definition: Useful responses are responses that are
productive at advancing the student’s understanding and helping them learn from their errors. These
are responses that lead to the student getting similar
questions right in the future, and not just figuring
out the answer to this specific problem.
• Response A is much more useful.
• Response A is somewhat more useful.
• Responses A and B are equally useful.

(a) Instructions

(b) Step 1 & 2

(c) Step 3

(d) Step 4 & 5

Figure 3: Annotation interface for collecting decisions and responses.

• Response B is somewhat more useful.
• Response B is much more useful.
Which response is more caring?
Definition: Caring responses are responses that
express kindness or concern for the student. They
foster a collaborative and supportive relationship
between the tutor and the student.
• Response A is much more caring.
• Response A is somewhat more caring.
• Responses A and B are equally caring.

Which response is more human-sounding?
Which of the responses sounds more human, and
less like a machine or artificial intelligence entity
typed it?
• Response A is much more human-sounding.
• Response A is somewhat more humansounding.
• Responses A and B are equally humansounding.
• Response B is somewhat more humansounding.
• Response B is much more human-sounding.

• Response B is somewhat more caring.
• Response B is much more caring.

Which response would you rather choose to
respond with if you were the tutor?

No Decision-Making Prompt for gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo
You are an experienced elementary math teacher and you are going to respond to a
student’s mistake in a useful and caring way. The problem your student is solving is
on topic: {lesson_topic}.
{c_h}
tutor (maximum one sentence):

Figure 4: Prompt for the no decision-making condition for gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo. {lesson_topic} is the
placeholder for the lesson topic discussed in the conversation. {c_h} is the placeholder for the conversation history
leading up to (and including) the student’s message that contains the mistake. We add an additional constraint
“(maximum one sentence)” because from our experiments, gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4 typically output extremely
long responses that would be unnatural for this tutoring conversation domain.
No Decision-Making Prompt for llama-2
### System:
You are an experienced elementary math teacher and you are going to respond to a
student’s mistake in a useful and caring way.
### User:
Lesson topic:
Conversation:
{c_h}

{lesson_topic}

### Assistant:
tutor (maximum one sentence):

Figure 5: Prompt for the no decision-making condition for llama-2. {lesson_topic} is the placeholder for the
lesson topic discussed in the conversation. {c_h} is the placeholder for the conversation history leading up to (and
including) the student’s message that contains the mistake.

• I strongly prefer to pick Response A.
• I prefer to pick Response A.
• I equally prefer either Response A or B.
• I prefer to pick Response B.
• I strongly prefer to pick Response B.

F

Lexical analysis

Table 4 compares the top-5 bigram usage for
ChatGPT in all decision-making conditions. Table 5 does the same for Llama-2-70b-instruct.

Decision-Making Prompt for gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo
You are an experienced elementary math teacher and you are going to respond to a
student’s mistake in a useful and caring way. The problem your student is solving is
on topic: {lesson_topic}. {e} {z_what} in order to {z_why}.
{c_h}
tutor (maximum one sentence):

Figure 6: Prompt for the decision-making condition for gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo. {lesson_topic} is the
placeholder for the lesson topic discussed in the conversation. The error, strategy, and intention decisions are
included in the prompt where {e} is a placeholder for the error type, {z_what} for the strategy and {z_why} for
the intention. Note that each of the decisions are formatted to be a coherent piece of text. {c_h} is the placeholder
for the conversation history leading up to (and including) the student’s message that contains the mistake. We add
an additional constraint “(maximum one sentence)” because from our experiments, gpt-3.5-turbo and gpt-4
typically output extremely long responses that would be unnatural for this tutoring conversation domain.

Decision-Making Prompt for llama-2
### System:
You are an experienced elementary math teacher and you are going to respond to a
student’s mistake in a useful and caring way.
### User:
{e} {z_what} in order to {z_why}.
Lesson topic: {lesson_topic}
Conversation:
{c_h}
### Assistant:
tutor (maximum one sentence):

Figure 7: Prompt for the decision-making condition for llama-2. {lesson_topic} is the placeholder for the
lesson topic discussed in the conversation. The error, strategy, and intention decisions are included in the prompt
where {e} is a placeholder for the error type, {z_what} for the strategy and {z_why} for the intention. Note that
each of the decisions are formatted to be a coherent piece of text. {c_h} is the placeholder for the conversation
history leading up to (and including) the student’s message that contains the mistake.

None + ChatGPT

Expert + ChatGPT

ChatGPT + ChatGPT

Random +ChatGPT

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

effort_remember
lets_focus
carry_tens
focus_question
clarify_mean

2.34
1.32
1.31
1.31
1.31

can_explain
great_start
can_tell
explain_got
got_answer

2.14
1.94
1.88
1.53
1.42

actually_correct
correct_answer
job_attempting
small_mistake
attempting_problem

2.9
1.96
1.42
1.42
1.42

thats_close
example_help
can_think
can_try
glasses_water

1.85
1.69
1.51
1.51
1.47

Table 4: Top 5 bigrams for ChatGPT. ChatGPT with expert decision-making engages more with the student’s
problem-solving process, whereas ChatGPT with self decision-making engages more with the student’s answer.

Determine Error (e) with gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo.
You are an experienced elementary math teacher. Your task is to read a conversation
snippet of a tutoring session between a student and tutor, and determine what type
of error the student makes in the conversation. We have a list of common errors that
students make in math, which you can pick from. We also give you the option to write in
your own error type if none of the options apply.
Error list:
0. Student does not seem to understand or guessed the answer.
1. Student misinterpreted the question.
2. Student made a careless mistake.
3. Student has the right idea, but is not quite there.
4. Student’s answer is not precise enough or the tutor is being too picky about the form
of the student’s answer.
5. None of the above, but I have a different description (please specify in your
reasoning).
6. Not sure, but I’m going to try to diagnose the student.
Here is the conversation snippet:
Lesson topic: {lesson_topic}
Conversation:
{c_h}
Why do you think the student made this mistake? Pick an option number from the error
list and provide the reason behind your choice. Format your answer as: [{"answer": #,
"reason": "write out your reason for picking # here"}]

Figure 8: Prompt to determine error e with gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo. {lesson_topic} is the placeholder for
the lesson topic discussed in the conversation. {c_h} is the placeholder for the conversation history leading up to
(and including) the student’s message that contains the mistake.

None + Llama

Expert + Llama

Llama + Llama

Random +Llama

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

bigram

log odds

user_lesson
user_tutor
respond_students
mistake_useful
going_respond

8.02
4.27
3.62
3.54
3.52

lets_closer
closer_look
look_problem
look_expression
groups_objects

3.73
3.73
2.51
1.56
1.56

user_student
student_responds
student_understand
response_provide
provide_hint

5.79
4.65
4.0
3.85
3.09

lets_closer
closer_look
right_track
youre_right
look_answer

3.27
3.27
2.49
2.09
1.7

Table 5: Top 5 bigrams for Llama-2-70b-instruct.

Determine Error (e) with llama-2.
### System:
You are an experienced elementary math teacher. Your task is to read a conversation
snippet of a tutoring session between a student and tutor, and determine what type
of error the student makes in the conversation. We have a list of common errors that
students make in math, which you can pick from. We also give you the option to write in
your own error type if none of the options apply.
Error list:
0. Student does not seem to understand or guessed the answer.
1. Student misinterpreted the question.
2. Student made a careless mistake.
3. Student has the right idea, but is not quite there.
4. Student’s answer is not precise enough or the tutor is being too picky about the form
of the student’s answer.
5. None of the above, but I have a different description (please specify in your
reasoning).
6. Not sure, but I’m going to try to diagnose the student.
Format your answer as:
here"}]
### User:
Lesson topic:
Conversation:
{c_h}

[{"answer":

#, "reason":

"write out your reason for picking #

{lesson_topic}

### Assistant:
[{"answer":

Figure 9: Prompt to determine error e with llama-2. {lesson_topic} is the placeholder for the lesson topic
discussed in the conversation. {c_h} is the placeholder for the conversation history leading up to (and including)
the student’s message that contains the mistake.

Determine Strategy and Intention (zwhat , zwhy ) with gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo.
You are an experienced elementary math teacher. Your task is to read a conversation
snippet of a tutoring session between a student and tutor where a student makes a mistake.
You should then determine what strategy you want to use to remediate the student’s error,
and state your intention in using that strategy. We have a list of common strategies and
intentions that teachers use, which you can pick from. We also give you the option to
write in your own strategy or intention if none of the options apply.
Strategies:
0. Explain a concept
1. Ask a question
2. Provide a hint
3. Provide a strategy
4. Provide a worked example
5. Provide a minor correction
6. Provide a similar problem
7. Simplify the question
8. Affirm the correct answer
9. Encourage the student
10. Other (please specify in your reasoning)
Intentions:
0. Motivate the student
1. Get the student to elaborate their answer
2. Correct the student’s mistake
3. Hint at the student’s mistake
4. Clarify a student’s misunderstanding
5. Help the student understand the lesson topic or solution strategy
6. Diagnose the student’s mistake
7. Support the student in their thinking or problem-solving
8. Explain the student’s mistake (eg. what is wrong in their answer or why is it
incorrect)
9. Signal to the student that they have solved or not solved the problem
10. Other (please specify in your reasoning)
Here is the conversation snippet:
Lesson topic: {lesson_topic}
Conversation:
{c_h}
How would you remediate the student’s error and why? Pick the option number from the
list of strategies and intentions and provide the reason behind your choices. Format
your answer as: [{"strategy": #, "intention": #, "reason": "write out your reason for
picking that strategy and intention"}]

Figure 10: Prompt to determine strategy and intention zwhat , zwhy with gpt-4 and gpt-3.5-turbo.
{lesson_topic} is the placeholder for the lesson topic discussed in the conversation. {c_h} is the placeholder for
the conversation history leading up to (and including) the student’s message that contains the mistake.

Determine Strategy and Intention (zwhat , zwhy ) with llama-2.
### System:
You are an experienced elementary math teacher. Your task is to read a conversation
snippet of a tutoring session between a student and tutor where a student makes a mistake.
You should then determine what strategy you want to use to remediate the student’s error,
and state your intention in using that strategy. We have a list of common strategies and
intentions that teachers use, which you can pick from. We also give you the option to
write in your own strategy or intention if none of the options apply.
Strategies:
0. Explain a concept
1. Ask a question
2. Provide a hint
3. Provide a strategy
4. Provide a worked example
5. Provide a minor correction
6. Provide a similar problem
7. Simplify the question
8. Affirm the correct answer
9. Encourage the student
10. Other (please specify in your reasoning)
Intentions:
0. Motivate the student
1. Get the student to elaborate their answer
2. Correct the student’s mistake
3. Hint at the student’s mistake
4. Clarify a student’s misunderstanding
5. Help the student understand the lesson topic or solution strategy
6. Diagnose the student’s mistake
7. Support the student in their thinking or problem-solving
8. Explain the student’s mistake (eg. what is wrong in their answer or why is it
incorrect)
9. Signal to the student that they have solved or not solved the problem
10. Other (please specify in your reasoning)
Format your answer as: [{"strategy":
reason for picking # here"}]
### User:
Lesson topic:
Conversation:
{c_h}

#, "intention":

#, "reason":

"write out your

{lesson_topic}

### Assistant:
[{"strategy":

Figure 11: Prompt to determine error zwhat , zwhy with llama-2. {lesson_topic} is the placeholder for the
lesson topic discussed in the conversation. {c_h} is the placeholder for the conversation history leading up to (and
including) the student’s message that contains the mistake.

Figure 12: Annotation interface for evaluating the remediation responses.

