MathTutorBench: A Benchmark for Measuring Open-ended
Pedagogical Capabilities of LLM Tutors
Jakub Macina1,2 Nico Daheim1,3 Ido Hakimi1,2
Manu Kapur4 Iryna Gurevych3 Mrinmaya Sachan1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich 2 ETH AI Center
3
Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing Lab (UKP Lab), Department of Computer Science,
Technical University of Darmstadt and National Research Center
for Applied Cybersecurity ATHENE, Germany
4
Professorship for Learning Sciences and Higher Education, ETH Zurich
Abstract
1

Evaluating the pedagogical capabilities of AIbased tutoring models is critical for making
guided progress in the field. Yet, we lack a
reliable, easy-to-use, and simple-to-run evaluation that reflects the pedagogical abilities of
models. To fill this gap, we present M ATH T UTOR B ENCH, an open-source benchmark for
holistic tutoring model evaluation. M ATH T U TOR B ENCH contains a collection of datasets
and metrics that broadly cover tutor abilities as
defined by learning sciences research in dialogbased teaching. To score the pedagogical quality of open-ended teacher responses, we train
a reward model and show it can discriminate
expert from novice teacher responses with high
accuracy. We evaluate a wide set of closed- and
open-weight models on M ATH T UTOR B ENCH
and find that subject expertise, indicated by
solving ability, does not immediately translate
to good teaching. Rather, pedagogy and subject expertise appear to form a trade-off that
is navigated by the degree of tutoring specialization of the model. Furthermore, tutoring
appears to become more challenging in longer
dialogs, where simpler questioning strategies
begin to fail. We release the benchmark, code,
and leaderboard openly to enable rapid benchmarking of future models.1

Figure 1: Effective teaching requires various skills
which we categorize into expertise, student understanding, and pedagogical ability. M ATH T UTOR B ENCH evalutes these according to the tasks shown in the outer ring.

github.com/eth-lre/mathtutorbench

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) present an opportunity to transform education by offering ubiquitous access to individualized tutoring (Jurenka
et al., 2024). While these models excel at generating correct answers (Wei et al., 2022; Achiam
et al., 2023), experienced teachers help students
think for themselves and do not just give away answers to make learning effortless (Sharma et al.,
2024). Teaching involves a combination of skills
1

Correspondence to jakub.macina@ai.ethz.ch.

including subject expertise, the ability to diagnose
and correct student mistakes, and the application
of sound pedagogical techniques. For example,
teachers need to know when to withhold answers
from students, use Socratic questioning (Anghileri,
2006), or how to engage them cognitively in problem solving (Chi and Wylie, 2014; Kapur, 2016).
Therefore, a crucial element of building LLM tutors is their evaluation; it is critical to understand
whether their guidance is helpful to prevent harm,
and to guide progress in future model development.
Yet, current evaluation practices do not meet
these criteria. On the one hand, automatic metrics usually evaluate tutoring models by measuring
the word overlap between a ground-truth response
and a generated response (Tack et al., 2023), or
focus exclusively on question-answering performance (Chevalier et al., 2024). This is fast but
arguably fails to capture the intricacies of tutoring.
Although human evaluation might be a way to capture these nuances by defining suitable criteria to
capture them (Tack and Piech, 2022; Maurya et al.,
2025), it is expensive. Importantly, it can only cre-

204
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 204–221
November 4-9, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

ate a snapshot of current performance and cannot
be used to evaluate or compare to future models.
In this work, we fill this gap by releasing M ATH T UTOR B ENCH, a collection of datasets and metrics to holistically evaluate dialog tutoring models for math tutoring. Teaching is a complex and
multifaceted task that extends beyond subject mastery (Boyer et al., 2008; Nye et al., 2014; Tack et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024b). Therefore, M ATH T U TOR B ENCH is divided into three categories: math
expertise which evaluates the subject-matter expertise of the tutor, student understanding which evaluates the tutor’s ability to verify, locate and correct
student solutions, and teacher response generation
which evaluates the scaffolding abilities of the tutor.
Math expertise and student understanding are evaluated based on standard metrics, and we propose a
novel metric for evaluating teacher response generation. In particular, we train a small and quickto-run reward model by contrasting effective and
less effective tutor utterances in terms of structured
scaffolding guidance with questions and hints instead of giving away the answer (Anghileri, 2006).
The reward model is then used to score tutor model
generations. We show that this metric is reliable
by showing that it can distinguish utterances from
expert teachers from those stemming from novice
teachers (Wang et al., 2024b) with high accuracy.
We evaluate various open- and closed-weight
state-of-the-art LLMs and specialized tutoring models on M ATH T UTOR B ENCH. Our results show
that there is a trade-off between subject expertise
and pedagogical abilities that is dependent on the
degree of specialization of a tutoring LLM. Specializing an LLM for pedagogy comes at the cost
of solving ability and, conversely, a high solving
accuracy often means that the LLM lacks pedagogy. Still, more specialized tutoring models tend
to retain their teaching abilities even further into a
dialog with a student, while general models quickly
become worse. With this, our work contributes to
accelerating the development of tutoring LLMs by
providing a holistic benchmark that can be evaluated quickly and fairly using automatic metrics.
We release our code and data publicly to promote
open research on tutoring LLMs.

2

Related Work

2.1 LLM-Based Dialog Tutoring
A good tutor should scaffold student learning in
a structured way rather than just provide correct

answers. Current approaches to dialog tutoring
using LLMs try to achieve this by different means:
prompt-based elicitation of pedagogical behavior,
finetuning models on pedagogical conversations,
and alignment with pedagogical preferences.
First, most existing works use LLMs with a carefully chosen prompt which enumerates desired pedagogical behavior. Bridge (Wang et al., 2024b) analyzes the teacher behavior and proposes to structure
the prompt into a sequence of decisions, similar to
real teachers, first to infer the error type and then
to determine the pedagogical intent. Other works
mostly directly write extensive prompts (Sonkar
et al., 2023; Kargupta et al., 2024). However,
defining such prompts is tedious, sensitive to small
changes and difficult to test (Jurenka et al., 2024).
Second, several approaches finetune models on
real or mostly synthetically generated data. SocraticLM (Liu et al., 2024) uses a GPT-4 judge
to evaluate the quality of teacher guidance using
correctness and Socratic principles. A similar approach is to role-model teacher and student conversations based on textbook data (Chevalier et al.,
2024; Wang et al., 2024a). MathDial (Macina et al.,
2023a) is one of the few works that use teachers’ utterances when interacting with students to finetune
models. However, it is expensive to collect such
data on a larger scale. Therefore, LearnLM (Team
et al., 2025) uses an empirically validated mixture
of synthetic and teacher-created datasets. However,
for capturing high-quality tutoring, teacher-created
data is essential and therefore upweighted in their final data mix. Finally, LLMs can be aligned for pedagogical preferences during post-training (Team
et al., 2025), because these are usually tacit. However, no datasets are openly available or they rely
on larger models such as GPT-4 as a judge which
limits its generalizability.
Our benchmark contributes an important missing
ingredient in the development of LLM-based tutors
– the ability to quickly evaluate and compare models
on key pedagogical aspects.
2.2

Automatic & Human Evaluation

Several works rely on automatic NLG metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) or
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2020) for evaluation
which require human-annotated ground truths.
However, since tutoring has the goal of helping
students learn (Macina et al., 2023b), it is very
open-ended and there is no single best pedagogical
approach at each turn (Jurenka et al., 2024). This

205

Task
Dataset
System Prompt
+ Problem
+ Student-Teacher Dialog

Tutoring
LLMs

Metric
Ground-truth
teacher responses
Reward Model

Figure 2: Overview of the MathTutorBench benchmark. Each benchmark task defines a dataset, system prompts with
problem and dialog, metric, and ground-truth teacher responses. A reward model is used to score the pedagogical
quality over teacher responses (win rate). The right part of the figure shows the outcome as a performance
comparison of selected LLMs. While they all perform well in a simple problem-solving setting, most of them lack
in correct detection of mistakes and generating pedagogical responses.

results in noisy and unreliable scores from automatic metrics (Tack et al., 2023). There exists an
educational-specific classifier of active teacher listening (Demszky et al., 2021), however, it is limited
to only this one dimension of teaching and does
not account for the entire dialog history. Therefore,
recent finetuned tutoring LLMs (Chevalier et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2024) rely on GPT-4-as-a-judge
on dimensions like helpfulness and presentation.
Some works on reasoning (Liang et al., 2024) also
focus on multi-turn model abilities judged by GPT4 but they lack an educational focus.
Pedagogical quality annotation requires hiring
teachers, but it is time-consuming and hard to compare across trials. Two papers recently addressed
the issue (Tack and Piech, 2022; Maurya et al.,
2025) by providing evaluation taxonomies but only
present one-off static snapshots of current models’
performance without the possibility to automatically evaluate new models. Finally, measuring
student learning gains directly focuses on the end
goal. However, learner studies are costly, timeconsuming (Schmucker et al., 2024), and with strict
ethics and privacy requirements. There is a growing interest in designing proper evaluation guidelines (Tack et al., 2023; Jurenka et al., 2024), however, there is still a need for a unified automatic

evaluation for scalable model development.
M ATH T UTOR B ENCH addresses the limitations
of existing automatic metrics by focusing specifically on tutoring, is simple to run, replicable, and
could serve as a proxy for deciding which models
to focus on in human studies. Moreover, our benchmark only uses data collected from real teachers.

3

Background

3.1

Next Teacher Utterance Generation

We focus on educational dialogues between a student and a teacher, where a student is trying to solve
a multi-step problem p ∈ V ∗ . The problem has a
single numerical solution a and a sequence of solution steps s = (s1 , . . . , sN ), where each sn ∈ V ∗
and sN contains the final answer a. A student solution consists of steps b
s = (b
s1 , . . . , b
sM ) and the first
step with a mistake is e ∈ {0, 1, . . . , M }, where
e = 0 means no mistake.
The goal of dialog tutoring is to continue an existing teacher-student dialog H := (u1 , . . . , uT −1 )
consisting of T − 1 turns ut ∈ V ∗ with a new turn
uT ∈ V ∗ that simulates the teacher and guides the
student towards solving a problem. This is usually done by learning a model pθ (uT | H, K, it )
with parameters θ ∈ Rd , which is optionally conditioned on background knowledge K (in our case

206

Task(s)
Dataset
Input
Type
Ground Truth
Instances
Avg. turns

Math Expertise
Problem
Socratic
solving
questioning
GSM8k
GSM8k
p
p
generation generation
a
q1 , . . . , qN
1319
1319
-

Student Understanding
Solution
Mistake
Mistake
correctness
location
correction
StepVerify
StepVerify StepVerify
p, b
s
p, b
s
p, H
bin. clas. (bal.)
multi-cl.
generation
1(e ̸= 0)
e
a
2004
2004
1002
3.04

Teacher Response Generation
Scaffolding Gen.,
Scaffolding Gen.,
Ped. instr. following Ped. instr. following
MathDialBridge
MathDialBridge[hard]
p, H
p, H
generation
generation
uteacher
uteacher
1150
327
3.08
5.78

Table 1: Datasets used in the benchmark and their statistics. Notation defined in Section 3.

only the problem p) and a teacher intent iT , and
using a decoding strategy, such as greedy decoding
or sampling according to pθ to generate an output.
The turn uT should then fulfill the desiderate laid
out in Section 3.2. The goal of this work is to
present a benchmark to understand the quality of
various uT generated by different models θ.
3.2 Learning Sciences Principles
We focus on 1:1 multi-turn teacher-student interactions where teachers promote active learning (Freeman et al., 2014) by engaging students through
scaffolding nudges, hints, and Socratic questioning. Based on effective teaching research (Graesser
et al., 1995; Lepper and Woolverton, 2002; Litman
and Forbes-Riley, 2006; Boyer et al., 2008; Chi
and Wylie, 2014; Nye et al., 2014; Jurenka et al.,
2024), we define the following pedagogical principles: (a) correctness: the teacher should guide the
student towards the correct answer and not state
incorrect facts; (b) scaffolding instead of giving
away the answer: the teacher should help the student to cognitively engage with the problem and
discover the answer on their own; (c) encourage
self-correction: by correctly identifying the student
mistake and first giving the student the opportunity
to self-correct and learn from a mistake; (d) not
overload student: manage cognitive load by not
giving too much information at once.

4

MathTutorBench

We introduce M ATH T UTOR B ENCH, a benchmark
that evaluates the tutoring capabilities of tutoring
models. M ATH T UTOR B ENCH consists of three
high-level skills that a good human teacher needs to
have (Bommasani et al., 2021): Expertise, Student
Understanding and Pedagogical Abilities. These
skills are tested by seven different tasks, each consisting of a dataset, prompt, and metric. All tasks
in M ATH T UTOR B ENCH are related to math tutoring. The problems are mostly sourced from
GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021). Table 1 summarizes

the datasets and tasks. The prompts used for the
tasks in the benchmark are shown in Appendix B.
4.1

Tasks

This section explains each task and complements
Table 1 with the rationale for including it.
1. Problem Solving. We include a math word
problem solving task that measures the accuracy
of the final numeric answer generated with chainof-thought (Wei et al., 2022) compared to the answer a. Even though this type of evaluation is
popular, saturated, and contaminated, in M ATH T U TOR B ENCH it serves as an indicator of a balance
between expertise and pedagogical abilities.
2. Socratic Questioning. Socratic questioning
is related to the problem decomposition to smaller
and more manageable parts. This task is to evaluate
whether a model generates for each correct step
sn at least one corresponding guidance question
qn towards the correct answer, which could be
posed to the student instead of simply providing
the answer (Shridhar et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024).
3. Student Solution Correctness. This task evaluates a teacher’s ability to verify the correctness of
a student’s answer. Framed as a balanced binary
classification task based on student solution chain
sb, this dimension ensures that the model can objectively discern whether a student’s reply is correct
or incorrect, a crucial prerequisite for providing
accurate feedback and identification of misconceptions (Wang et al., 2024b).
4. Student Mistake Location. Mistake location
is a critical component of effective tutoring, focusing on a teacher’s ability to accurately identify the
exact location of the first mistake in a student’s response b
s (Daheim et al., 2024). This task assesses
whether a tutoring model can pinpoint where a student’s reasoning has gone wrong, enabling timely
and precise feedback. By detecting steps with mistakes, the model can help students understand their
misconceptions and steer the conversation to mitigate them, thus fostering a more productive learn-

207

ing experience (Kapur, 2016; Wang et al., 2024b).
5. Student Mistake Correction. This task measures the performance of a model to generate a reasoning chain with a correct final numeric answer a
even though the student proposes an incorrect answer in the dialog history H. The conditioning on
dialog history is the difference to Problem Solving.
We test the models’ ability to handle incorrect solutions. Models should not get derailed by students’
incorrect steps. From a broader perspective, even
if there is an incorrect step in a dialog history H,
this tests the recovery of a model from mistakes.
6. Scaffolding Generation (scaff.). The task is to
generate the next teacher utterance uT as a continuation of the dialog. As it is an open-ended task,
we use a reward model to score generations over
teacher responses (explained in Section 4.3) to estimate its’ pedagogical quality. The tasks consist
of two variations. Scaffolding generation focuses
on generating an immediate response to a student’s
incorrect solution. We use a simple prompt for this
version asking models to respond to a student as
“an experienced math teacher in a useful and caring
way“ (Wang et al., 2024b). The second version
is scaffolding generation [hard], a variant with a
longer conversation history (avg. 5.78 turns).
7. Pedagogical Instruction Following (IF) for
Scaffolding Generation. The task refers to the
ability of the model to follow pedagogical instructions in prompts and steer the model generations to
be more desired (Team et al., 2025). In this task, we
use the LearnLM ‘extended‘ prompt (Jurenka et al.,
2024) which specifically enumerates desired behaviors such as “nudging students”, “asking guiding
questions”, and “not overwhelm student”. Therefore, in contrast to a simple prompt from scaffolding generation, we hypothesize that models should
improve their generations to be more aligned with
our set of guiding principles from Section 3. The
same is applied to the hard portion of the dataset.
4.2 Datasets
The requirements for the dataset included in the
benchmark are to focus on middle school math content and contain 1:1 tutoring conversations written
by human teachers. We found two datasets that
fit the criteria, Bridge (Wang et al., 2024b) and
MathDial (Macina et al., 2023a). We excluded
NCTE (Demszky and Hill, 2023) dataset because
it is multi-persona. Bridge (Wang et al., 2024b)
contains 700 snippets of real online tutoring conversations by novice teachers, where each response

is revised by an expert teacher. MathDial (Macina
et al., 2023a) consists of 2.9k tutoring conversations collected by human teachers who interacted
with simulated students. Both datasets focus on
math, Bridge uses various problem sources and
MathDial sources problems from GSM8k (Cobbe
et al., 2021); a dataset of math word problems that
we used in the expertise task. We combine Bridge
and MathDial datasets into a combined dataset
called MathDialBridge which we further split into
one with a maximum of 4 utterances and the rest
we put into MathDialBridge[hard]. Finally, we
use the StepVerify (Daheim et al., 2024) dataset
which builds on top of the MathDial student incorrect solutions and introduces annotation of the
first erroneous step in a student solution. Table 1
describes all the datasets and their statistics.
4.3

Scaffolding Score

Evaluating pedagogical abilities in tutoring is inherently challenging due to the open-ended nature
of the involved tasks. Unlike more structured domains like factual question answering, pedagogy
requires assessing the quality of responses such as
questioning guidance to the root cause of a mistake, and actionability of productive scaffolding. In
other words, we need an efficient and lightweight
mechanism, a critic model, that can assign a meaningful score to a generative model’s output based
on its pedagogical effectiveness.
4.3.1

Criteria-based Scoring

The most straightforward approach is to train individual critic models for each pedagogical task using labeled data. For an evaluation taxonomy with
n total evaluation criteria, for each criterion i we
train a binary classifier Ci (y) that outputs a binary
prediction of whether the criteria is present or not
in response y. To combine these into P
a final score
for a response, we aggregate them as ni=1 Ci (y),
which represents a discrete score of the total number of predicted desired criteria for the response.
For example, MRBench (Maurya et al., 2025) is a
small dataset annotated with 8 criteria such as the
presence of guidance, actionability, and telling the
answer. However, the scale of the required data
and sparse features pose significant challenges.
4.3.2

Pairwise Ranking of Teacher Responses

Since labeled data for each criterion can be scarce,
we here explore a more unified strategy. Instead of
training a separate model for each criterion, where

208

Dataset
GSM8k-inpainted
(Cobbe et al., 2021)
Training datasets
MathDial
(Macina et al., 2023a)

MRBench
(Maurya et al., 2025)

Test dataset
Bridge
(Wang et al., 2024b)

Split
all

Pref. pairs
22,753

Avg. turns
4.38

Preferred resp.
Subquestion qt

Rejected resp.
Solution steps st:

Settings
Math Word Problems with
matching solutions steps
st to subquestions qt

train

3,615

2.93

Reference sol. s

Tutoring conversations
created by human
teachers interacting with
LLM students

N/A

4,521

3.74

Teacher utterances
with it annotated as
probing and focus
in the first 3 teacher
turns.
Response with a
higher number of
desired criteria

Response with
fewer desired
criteria

Human annotation across
8 tutoring criteria guidance, actionability,
answer reveal, mistake
identification, mistake
location, coherence, tone,
humanness

all

482

2.79

Expert teacher
response

Novice teacher
response

Original novice teacher
responses and revisions
by expert teachers

Table 2: Datasets used to create pedagogical pairwise preference data.

each annotation criterion has inherent subjectivity,
we relax the objective and train a single critic model
that aggregates multiple criteria into a pairwise
comparison. We train a reward model using binary
ranking loss by following Ouyang et al. (2022):
Lrank = − log σ (rθ (x, yc ) − rθ (x, yr ) − m)
(1)
where rθ (x, y) is the scalar score for prompt x
and generation y, yc and yr are preferred (chosen)
and rejected generations respectively. The margin
m(yc , yr ) represents the numerical quality difference between the chosen and rejected response but
may also be set to 0 if not available.
4.3.3 Pairwise Preference Data Pipeline
To create pairwise preference data, we follow our
pedagogical criteria from Section 3.2. For example,
a response is preferred if it is a Socratic question
qt or it has dialog intent it which probes student
understanding. Contrary, a response is chosen as rejected if it contains part(s) of the reference solution
s or has a lower number of desired criteria.
To formalize this, for a given dialog history H
and a taxonomy with n criteria, we define a score
for each response y:
f (y) =

n
X

1(y has desired criterion i)

(2)

i=1

where 1(·) is the indicator function that equals 1
if · holds and 0 otherwise. The condition within
the indicator function is determined by: a) hu-

man criteria annotations (for MRBench (Maurya et al., 2025)), b) dialog intent annotations
it of the used pedagogical strategy (for MathDial (Macina et al., 2023a)), and c) subquestion
annotation qt (for GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021)).
For each pair of responses (yi , yj ), we construct a
dataset of preference-label pairs D = {(yi , yj ) |
f (yi ) > f (yj )}, where the margin is defined as
m(yi , yj ) = f (yi ) − f (yj ). The dataset captures
the relative preference between responses based on
the number of desired criteria they exhibit. The
description of the datasets used for training and
testing is found in Table 2.

5

Experiments

5.1

Models

MathTutorBench includes an evaluation of three
groups of models: general LLMs, LLM tutors,
and math reasoners. General LLMs such as openweight Llama3.1 70B and 8B, newer Llama3.2
3B model, and closed source gpt-4o-mini. We
use specialized tutoring models, namely closedsourced LearnLM-1.5-Pro and recent open-source
tutoring models Qwen2.5-7B-SocraticLM (Liu
et al., 2024) and Llemma-7B-32K-MathMix
(ScienceTutor) (Chevalier et al., 2024).
To measure the importance of specially
finetuned tutoring models, we evaluate the
Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct, which is optimized
for math reasoning and was used for finetuning the
specialized tutor model SocraticLM.

209

1.75

Expert
Novice

1.50

1.0

0.75

Density

Density

Density

1.00

0.6
0.4

0.50

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

Normalized Rewards

0.0

1.0

(a) Prompted

0.8
0.6
0.4

0.2

0.25

Expert
Novice

1.2

0.8

1.25

0.00

Expert
Novice

1.0

0.2
1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Normalized Rewards

0.5

0.0

1.0

(b) With Extended Prompt

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

Normalized Rewards

1.0

(c) Finetuned

Figure 3: Reward model distribution scores for expert and novice teachers across prompted (prompt in Figure 6),
with extended prompt (prompt in Figure 7), and finetuned Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct models.
Data Mix & Setting
GSM8k-inpainted (22k)
MathDial (3.6k)
MRBench (4.5k)
+ margin in loss (4.5k)
+ pretraining (16.7k)
+ MathDial (8.1k)

Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct
Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct

Model

Modern-BERT Ensemble
internlm2-7b
Skywork-Llama3.1-8B
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
Prometheus-7b-v2.0
GPT4o-mini

Accuracy
0.60
0.77
0.80
0.79
0.80
0.84

Avg. margin
3.26
1.57
2.60
7.68
3.09
5.75

Table 3: Ablation of Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct reward
model. Total number of training instances in brackets.
+ indicates an addition to the model. Pretraining uses
20% of Ultrafeedback (Cui et al., 2024). We select the
most accurate model to calculate the Scaffolding score.

Random (50%)
Fine-tuned
Extended Prompted
Prompted
0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00

Accuracy

Figure 4: Models performance on pairwise judgment
of teacher responses. We compute accuracy on an independent test set based on Bridge dataset (Wang et al.,
2024b) as a proportion of expert teacher responses preferred over novice teacher responses. Extended prompt
enumerates our pedagogical criteria (Figure 7).

5.2 Scaffolding Score - Data and Metrics
The goal of the Scaffolding score is to estimate
the pedagogical quality of the teacher’s response
generation. To validate it, we use a test set containing 482 examples derived from the Bridge
dataset (Wang et al., 2024b) which contains student
dialogs with novice teachers. In Bridge, novice
teacher responses are improved by expert teachers
following an expert-defined decision-making process. The process first identifies the type of error
and then determines the pedagogical strategy and
intent. For example, while novice teachers tend to
explicitly correct student mistakes by giving away
correct answers to students, expert teachers use
various scaffolding nudges such as the Socratic
method, use hints, or ask for further elaboration of
the problematic part.

Training data used for training the Scaffolding
reward model and its ablation are in Table 2. Desired criteria for MRBench (Maurya et al., 2025)
are "No" for Revealing of the answer, "Encouraging" for Tutor Tone, and "Yes" for Mistake Identification, Mistake Location, Providing Guidance,
Actionability, Coherence and Human-Likeness. To
ensure no test set contamination with the training
data, we strictly removed all instances from the test
set about any topic already present in the training
data. Therefore, test set samples contain not only
unseen instances but also unseen topics by models.
We use the following formula to compute the
accuracy of pairwise ranking between the expert
teacher and the novice teacher:
N

1 X
1(yexpert,i > ynovice,i ).
N

(3)

i=1

5.3

Scaffolding Score - Models and Baselines

We use LLM-as-a-judge prompting as a
baseline, similar to Jurenka et al. (2024).

210

Model
Metric
LLaMA3.2-3B-Instruct
LLaMA3.1-8B-Instruct
LLaMA3.1-70B-Instruct
GPT-4o
LearnLM-1.5-Pro
Llemma-7B-ScienceTutor
Qwen2.5-7B-SocraticLM
Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct

Math Expertise
Problem
Socratic
solving questioning
accuracy
bleu
0.60
0.29
0.70
0.29
0.91
0.29
0.90
0.48
0.94
0.32
0.62
0.29
0.73
0.32
0.88
0.35

Student Understanding
Solution
Mistake
Mistake
correctness location correction
F1
micro F1 accuracy
0.67
0.41
0.13
0.63
0.29
0.09
0.71
0.56
0.19
0.67
0.37
0.84
0.75
0.57
0.74
0.66
0.29
0.16
0.05
0.39
0.23
0.43
0.47
0.49

scaff.
win rate
0.64
0.61
0.63
0.50
0.64
0.37
0.39
0.06

Pedagogy
Teacher response generation
ped.IF scaff. [hard] ped.IF [hard]
win rate
win rate
win rate
0.63
0.45
0.40
0.67
0.46
0.49
0.70
0.49
0.49
0.82
0.46
0.70
0.68
0.66
0.67
0.48
0.38
0.42
0.39
0.28
0.28
0.07
0.05
0.05

Table 4: We find that expertise and student understanding form a trade-off with pedagogy in tutor response generation.
Models are grouped into general, specialized tutoring, and math reasoning models. The win rate is computed as the
rate of the reward model preferring model responses over teacher responses. IF = Instruction Following.

For this, we use Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct,
GPT-4o-mini, and the specialized judge model
Prompetheus-7b-v2.0 (Kim et al., 2024). Moreover, we pick well-performing existing preferencetuned reward models with high scores from the
RewardBench (Lambert et al., 2025) on a variety of
chat comparisons, namely, Internlm2-7b-reward
and Skywork-Reward-Llama-3.1-8B-v0.2. To
finetune single criteria-based binary classifiers we use ModernBERTbase (Warner
et al., 2025) with a classification head. Finally, we use Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct and
Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024) for
finetuning on preference data, which are small
enough to run fast as a part of the benchmark.

6

Results

In this section, we showcase our core findings on
M ATH T UTOR B ENCH and demonstrate the robustness and quality of the scaffolding reward model.
6.1 Comparing SotA LLMs (Table 4)
Math expertise does not translate directly to student understanding and pedagogy. Our evaluations reveal a striking imbalance in current language models. While these models exhibit impressive domain knowledge and excel at Problem solving, as evidenced by their performance on datasets
like GSM8K, they consistently fall short in Scaffolding generation task. This is particularly clear
for Qwen2.5-Math and GPT4o.
Specialized tutoring models improve in pedagogy but do not retain the full solving abilities. The specialized tutoring model SocraticLM
achieves good Scaffolding scores for its size and
big improvements over the base model (Qwen2.5Math). However, it degrades in all Student Understanding tasks. Compared to SocraticLM, the

ScienceTutor degrades in math expertise but has
significantly better Student correctness solution
and pedagogical instruction following. Closedsourced LearnLM achieves a more reasonable balance across all skills and tasks.
Tutoring is more challenging on longer dialogs.
As indicated by the drop in performance in the win
rate of tasks, indicated with ‘hard‘, the longer the
context it is more difficult for more to adapt. For
example, it might be important to guide students
differently than with a simple Socratic questioning.
Only LearnLM can keep consistent performance.
Majority of models suffer by limited pedagogical instruction following. When we compare
scaffolding generation with instruction following
win rate (in base and hard splits), we notice
that GPT4o follows the pedagogical instructions
and gains a significant improvement (similarly,
there is a smaller improvement for ScienceTutor).
However, other models such as the SocraticLM,
LearnLM, or Llama models show decreased or similar performance suggesting a limited ability to
follow pedagogical instructions defined in prompt.
6.2

Scaffolding Score - Results

Figure 4 shows a comparison between various
models evaluated on the task of scoring expert
teacher responses higher than novice teacher responses, see Equation 3. LLM-as-a-judge models
are sensitive to prompts and positional bias, so we
randomize the order. We report simple and extended prompts with detailing pedagogical guidelines (with prompts in Figure 6 and 7) but their
accuracy is lower than 0.7. Performance of reward
models from RewardBench (Lambert et al., 2025)
on the pedagogical preferences is only slightly
higher than random, highlighting the difference

211

between general human preferences and pedagogical preference data. We also train a combination
of criteria-based ModernBERT binary classifiers
aggregated into a summed final score, however, it
lags behind extended-prompted LLM-as-a-judge
models (for individual criterion performance see
Table 5). We hypothesize the single criterion data
are highly sparse, noisy and imbalanced, and do
not have sufficient data size to work.
To summarize, Figure 3 and Figure 4 shows that
finetuning reward models on pedagogical preference data is essential, as these finetuned reward
models outperform both LLMs-as-a-judge models
and SoTA reward models from RewardBench, consistent with (Xu et al., 2024). We hypothesize that
this is because of the lack of pedagogical datasets
and a fundamental shift between a better chat response and a better pedagogical response.
Ablation of finetuning data. Table 3 shows the
results for various data mixtures of pedagogical
preference data. We see that synthetic inpainted
data (Dai et al., 2022) using stepwise questions and
answers from GSM8k do not lead to a significant
improvement over the base model. However, using pedagogical preference pairs based on human
annotators scores (Maurya et al., 2025) improves
the score to 0.8, more than any other baseline in
Table 4. However, as this dataset contains mostly
model generations, only one of the responses is
from a human teacher, and they are highly underrepresented. Therefore, we also include conversations from the MathDial training set (Macina et al.,
2023a), which is filtered by desired dialog acts.
(more details in Table 2). The resulting finetuned
model achieves the best accuracy of 0.84. As the
test set is completely separate and no problems
are shared between the train and test set, we pick
this reward model as our final model for computing the Scaffolding score for model generation win
rates over teacher responses (proportion of model
generations preferred over teacher responses).
Scores distribution. Additionaly, we plot in Figure 3 the model distribution over scores on the test
set. The prompted model with extended prompt and
the vanilla model cannot separate the teacher and
novice responses as well as the finetuned model.
This supports the idea that pedagogical criteria are
unique compared to general preference data and
we need high-quality pedagogical preference data.

7

Conclusion

In this work we propose M ATH T UTOR B ENCH, a
holistic benchmark for quick and cost-effective assessment of the educational capabilities of LLM
tutoring models. It fills a crucial gap in the literature, as it allows fast prototyping of models by
using only lightweight automatic and learned metrics to evaluate pedagogy. The goal is to not replace
human studies measuring learning outcomes, but
rather to serve as a measure of which models to
use and compare. Finally, we benchmark various
models and report a trade-off between expertise, understanding, and pedagogy, as well as diminishing
results on longer tutoring conversations.

Limitations
Our work focuses on high school math tutoring
and limits the insights of the benchmark to multistep math problems. Despite a limited number of
available conversation dataset in other domains,
we plan to extend the benchmark to further STEM
domains to generalize its applicability and reach.
The conversational data in the benchmark does
not contain conversations longer than 10 turns and
thus can miss to evaluate very long educational
conversations with long-term dependencies which
might be present in online tutoring classes.
We study 1:1 conversational tutoring between
teacher and student in this work. Specifically, we
focus on a teacher using hints and nudges to aid
student learning and provide engaging learning opportunities for students. However, there are additional functions of a teacher that we decided not to
model, for example building rapport or trust with
less engaged students.
The benchmark does not contain all possible dimensions for educational evaluation. For example,
it is missing a safety evaluation of potentially harmful tutor responses. It is an extensive research area
and not the goal of this work. However, as the
benchmark is open-source we plan to extend it to
include more safety evaluations.

Ethics Statement
Intended usage The goal of the benchmark is
to evaluate new and existing dialog tutoring models on the skills related to math expertise, student
understanding, and pedagogical capabilities. We
released the code and the dataset under CC-BY-4.0
license. This follows the licences of all the datasets
which we are using in the benchmark.

212

Accessibility and Potential Misuse The main
goal of our work is to encourage the community
to use the benchmark to improve existing tutoring
models by balancing expertise, student understanding, and proper pedagogical guidance. However,
there are potential risks related to the data and the
scoring reward model. Models could optimize for
reward hacking which could lead to suboptimal tutoring behaviour. Moreover, if the data contains
some unknown pattern, the risk is that this could be
exploited by new models to achieve higher scores.
However, we tried to mitigate this by including
various data sources in the benchmark and in the
training data, mostly human-annotated. We encourage the deployment of tutoring models in any case
with appropriate safeguards.

Acknowledgements
Jakub Macina acknowledges funding from the ETH
AI Center Doctoral Fellowship, Asuera Stiftung,
and the ETH Zurich Foundation. This work was
supported in part by the Swiss AI Initiative under a project (ID a04) on AI for Education. This
work has been funded by the LOEWE Distinguished Chair “Ubiquitous Knowledge Processing”, LOEWE initiative, Hesse, Germany (Grant
Number: LOEWE/4a//519/05/00.002(0002)/81)
and by the State of Hesse, Germany, as part of
the project “LLMentor: Expert-AI Coteaching of
‘Introduction to Scientific Work’” (Connectom Networking and Innovation Fund). We thank Shehzaad
Dhuliawala for valuable feedback and discussions.

References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, and 1 others. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
Julia Anghileri. 2006. Scaffolding practices that enhance mathematics learning. Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 9:33–52.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ
Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S
Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma
Brunskill, and 1 others. 2021. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258.
Kristy Elizabeth Boyer, Robert Phillips, Michael Wallis,
Mladen Vouk, and James Lester. 2008. Balancing

cognitive and motivational scaffolding in tutorial dialogue. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems, pages 239–
249, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Alexis Chevalier, Jiayi Geng, Alexander Wettig,
Howard Chen, Sebastian Mizera, Toni Annala, Max
Aragon, Arturo Rodriguez Fanlo, Simon Frieder, Simon Machado, Akshara Prabhakar, Ellie Thieu, Jiachen T. Wang, Zirui Wang, Xindi Wu, Mengzhou
Xia, Wenhan Xia, Jiatong Yu, Junjie Zhu, and 3
others. 2024. Language models as science tutors.
In Forty-first International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Michelene TH Chi and Ruth Wylie. 2014. The icap
framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learning outcomes. Educational psychologist,
49(4):219–243.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.
Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao,
Bingxiang He, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie,
Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, and 1 others. 2024. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language models with scaled ai
feedback. In Forty-first International Conference on
Machine Learning.
Nico Daheim, Jakub Macina, Manu Kapur, Iryna
Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024. Stepwise
verification and remediation of student reasoning errors with large language model tutors. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 8386–8411,
Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zhuyun Dai, Arun Tejasvi Chaganty, Vincent Y Zhao,
Aida Amini, Qazi Mamunur Rashid, Mike Green,
and Kelvin Guu. 2022. Dialog inpainting: Turning
documents into dialogs. In International conference
on machine learning, pages 4558–4586. PMLR.
Dorottya Demszky and Heather Hill. 2023. The NCTE
transcripts: A dataset of elementary math classroom
transcripts. In Proceedings of the 18th Workshop
on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational
Applications (BEA 2023), pages 528–538, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Dorottya Demszky, Jing Liu, Zid Mancenido, Julie
Cohen, Heather Hill, Dan Jurafsky, and Tatsunori
Hashimoto. 2021. Measuring conversational uptake:
A case study on student-teacher interactions. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1638–1653,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.

213

Scott Freeman, Sarah L Eddy, Miles McDonough,
Michelle K Smith, Nnadozie Okoroafor, Hannah
Jordt, and Mary Pat Wenderoth. 2014. Active learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and mathematics. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 111(23):8410–8415.
Arthur C Graesser, Natalie K Person, and Joseph P
Magliano. 1995. Collaborative dialogue patterns in
naturalistic one-to-one tutoring. Applied cognitive
psychology, 9(6):495–522.
Irina Jurenka, Markus Kunesch, Kevin R McKee,
Daniel Gillick, Shaojian Zhu, Sara Wiltberger, Shubham Milind Phal, Katherine Hermann, Daniel Kasenberg, Avishkar Bhoopchand, and 1 others. 2024. Towards responsible development of generative ai for
education: An evaluation-driven approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.12687.
Manu Kapur. 2016. Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive failure, and unproductive success in learning. Educational Psychologist,
51(2):289–299.

the study of highly effective tutors. In Joshua Aronson, editor, Improving Academic Achievement, Educational Psychology, pages 135–158. Academic Press,
San Diego.
Zhenwen Liang, Dian Yu, Wenhao Yu, Wenlin Yao, Zhihan Zhang, Xiangliang Zhang, and Dong Yu. 2024.
Mathchat: Benchmarking mathematical reasoning
and instruction following in multi-turn interactions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19444.
Diane Litman and Kate Forbes-Riley. 2006. Correlations between dialogue acts and learning in spoken
tutoring dialogues. Natural Language Engineering,
12(2):161–176.
Jiayu Liu, Zhenya Huang, Tong Xiao, Jing Sha, Jinze
Wu, Qi Liu, Shijin Wang, and Enhong Chen. 2024.
SocraticLM: Exploring socratic personalized teaching with large language models. In The Thirty-eighth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled
weight decay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

Priyanka Kargupta, Ishika Agarwal, Dilek Hakkani Tur,
and Jiawei Han. 2024. Instruct, not assist: LLMbased multi-turn planning and hierarchical questioning for socratic code debugging. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2024, pages 9475–9495, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan Chowdhury, Tanmay Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023a. MathDial: A dialogue tutoring
dataset with rich pedagogical properties grounded
in math reasoning problems. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2023, pages 5602–5621, Singapore. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Seungone Kim, Juyoung Suk, Shayne Longpre,
Bill Yuchen Lin, Jamin Shin, Sean Welleck, Graham
Neubig, Moontae Lee, Kyungjae Lee, and Minjoon
Seo. 2024. Prometheus 2: An open source language
model specialized in evaluating other language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
4334–4353, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Lingzhi Wang, Tanmay
Sinha, Manu Kapur, Iryna Gurevych, and Mrinmaya
Sachan. 2023b. Opportunities and challenges in neural dialog tutoring. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 2357–2372,
Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient
memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages
611–626.
Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison,
LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu,
Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi,
Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2025. RewardBench: Evaluating reward models for language
modeling. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages 1755–1797,
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Mark R. Lepper and Maria Woolverton. 2002. Chapter
7 - the wisdom of practice: Lessons learned from

Kaushal Kumar Maurya, Kv Aditya Srivatsa, Kseniia
Petukhova, and Ekaterina Kochmar. 2025. Unifying AI tutor evaluation: An evaluation taxonomy for
pedagogical ability assessment of LLM-powered AI
tutors. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the
Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1234–
1251, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Benjamin D Nye, Arthur C Graesser, and Xiangen Hu.
2014. Autotutor and family: A review of 17 years of
natural language tutoring. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education, 24:427–469.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1
others. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 35:27730–27744.

214

Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 311–318.

Leandro von Werra, Younes Belkada, Lewis Tunstall,
Edward Beeching, Tristan Thrush, Nathan Lambert,
Shengyi Huang, Kashif Rasul, and Quentin Gallouédec. 2020. Trl: Transformer reinforcement learning. https://github.com/huggingface/trl.

Robin Schmucker, Meng Xia, Amos Azaria, and Tom
Mitchell. 2024. Ruffle&riley: Insights from designing and evaluating a large language model-based conversational tutoring system. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education, pages
75–90. Springer.

Junling Wang, Jakub Macina, Nico Daheim, Sankalan
Pal Chowdhury, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2024a.
Book2Dial: Generating teacher student interactions
from textbooks for cost-effective development of educational chatbots. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024, pages 9707–
9731, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Mrinank Sharma, Meg Tong, Tomasz Korbak, David
Duvenaud, Amanda Askell, Samuel R. Bowman,
Esin Durmus, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Scott R Johnston, Shauna M Kravec, Timothy Maxwell, Sam McCandlish, Kamal Ndousse, Oliver Rausch, Nicholas
Schiefer, Da Yan, Miranda Zhang, and Ethan Perez.
2024. Towards understanding sycophancy in language models. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
Kumar Shridhar, Jakub Macina, Mennatallah El-Assady,
Tanmay Sinha, Manu Kapur, and Mrinmaya Sachan.
2022. Automatic generation of socratic subquestions
for teaching math word problems. In Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 4136–4149, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shashank Sonkar, Naiming Liu, Debshila Mallick, and
Richard Baraniuk. 2023. CLASS: A design framework for building intelligent tutoring systems based
on learning science principles. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2023, pages 1941–1961, Singapore. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Anaïs Tack, Ekaterina Kochmar, Zheng Yuan, Serge
Bibauw, and Chris Piech. 2023. The BEA 2023
shared task on generating AI teacher responses in
educational dialogues. In Proceedings of the 18th
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications (BEA 2023), pages 785–795,
Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Rose E. Wang, Qingyang Zhang, Carly Robinson, Susanna Loeb, and Dorottya Demszky. 2024b. Bridging
the novice-expert gap via models of decision-making:
A case study on remediating math mistakes. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavié,
Orion Weller, Oskar Hallström, Said Taghadouini,
Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas, Faisal Ladhak, Tom
Aarsen, Griffin Thomas Adams, Jeremy Howard, and
Iacopo Poli. 2025. Smarter, better, faster, longer:
A modern bidirectional encoder for fast, memory
efficient, and long context finetuning and inference.
In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 2526–2547, Vienna, Austria.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–
24837.

Anaïs Tack and Chris Piech. 2022. The ai teacher test:
Measuring the pedagogical ability of blender and gpt3 in educational dialogues. In Proceedings of the
15th International Conference on Educational Data
Mining, page 522.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien
Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz,
Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara
Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven
Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, and 3 others. 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing: System
Demonstrations, pages 38–45, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

LearnLM Team, Abhinit Modi, Aditya Srikanth Veerubhotla, Aliya Rysbek, Andrea Huber, Brett Wiltshire, Brian Veprek, Daniel Gillick, Daniel Kasenberg, Derek Ahmed, Irina Jurenka, James Cohan,
Jennifer She, Julia Wilkowski, Kaiz Alarakyia,
Kevin R. McKee, Lisa Wang, Markus Kunesch,
Mike Schaekermann, and 27 others. 2025. Learnlm:
Improving gemini for learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.16429.

Paiheng Xu, Jing Liu, Nathan Jones, Julie Cohen, and
Wei Ai. 2024. The promises and pitfalls of using
language models to measure instruction quality in
education. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 4375–4389,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

215

An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu,
Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, and 1 others. 2024. Qwen2.
5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115.

princeton-nlp/Llemma-7B-32K-MathMix,
and Qwen2.5-Math-7B-Instruct.

C

Reward Model Details

Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. In International
Conference on Learning Representations.

C.1

Implementation details

A

Scaffolding scores qualitative examples

Table 6 shows assigned scores for various model
and teacher responses given the problem and previous dialog. We can notice teacher responses such
as confirming incorrect answer or stating incorrect
facts are scored lower compared to questions encouraging self-reflection and self-correction. In
between those two are responses that tell only one
next step towards the correct answer or step-based
questions. Similarly, Table 7 has examples of
novice teacher responses from the test set categorized into score quartiles. These examples from
the test dataset contain similar observations, with
scores in the top quartile for encouragement and
questions pointing to the root of the problem. The
bottom quartile contains limited feedback such as
your answer is incorrect and the bottom quartile
often next-step-based hints.

B

C.2

Reward model inference runtime

Running the evaluation for all Teacher response
generation tasks (Scaffolding Generation and Pedagogical Instruction Following, both normal and
hard splits, in total 2 954 generations) takes under
10 minutes on a single GH200 GPU. The model
can process and score generations in batches and
increases from 7.01 examples/sec for the batch size
of 1 to 7.25 examples/sec for the batch size of 8.

D

Task Prompts

The exact prompts used in the benchmark are
shown in Figure 5. Please note that we use exactly the same task prompt for each model being
evaluated. Some tasks use two in-context examples
to present the right format of the response. The cost
to run the full benchmark with GPT4o-mini is less
than 3$. To run the open-weight models we use the
vllm library (Kwon et al., 2023). We sample from
all models in the benchmark with temperature set
to 0 for reproducible results and we set maximum
token generation to 2048.
B.1

We finetune all models using Huggingface transformers (Wolf et al., 2020) and trl library (von
Werra et al., 2020) using the checkpoints from the
Huggingface Model Hub by respecting the corresponding license agreements.
We finetune all models with a learning rate of
1 · 10−5 for 1 training epoch and with a batch size
of 16. We use the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov
and Hutter, 2019) and train on an NVIDIA A100
80GB GPU and finetuning takes around 1 hour for
each model.

Details on Single-Criteria Classifiers

The results of individual criteria classifiers on the
separate test set are shown in Figure 5. For training of the single-criteria classifiers we binarize
the data from MRBench (Maurya et al., 2025).
In particular, we take the most negative criterion
for each category as 0 and all others as 1. We
train ModernBERTbase with 149M parameters on
NVIDIA V100 GPUs. Again, we use the AdamW
optimizer with a learning rate of 1·10−5 and a batch
size of 16 but train for 3 epochs due to the small
data sizes. Training takes only ca. 15 minutes.

Details of Benchmarked Models

Specific versions of closed models we use
are gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 version and
learnlm-1.5-pro-experimental.
We use
these exact versions of open-weight models
loaded from Huggingface model hub (Wolf
et al., 2020):
LLaMA3.2-3B-Instruct,
LLaMA3.1-8B-Instruct,
Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct,
CogBase-USTC/SocraticLM,
216

Model
Actionability
Guidance
Tone
Mistake Identification
Mistake Location
Revealing
Aggregated ens.
Aggregated ens. (best 3)

Accuracy
0.78
0.44
0.46
0.61
0.63
0.39
0.66
0.68

Table 5: Results of the criteria-based binary classifiers on the test set. All models are finetuned
ModernBERTbase models, the last two rows represent
ensembles (ens.) with aggregated discrete binary predictions. The criteria are a subset of criteria from MRBench (Maurya et al., 2025).

217

Problem
Margaret wants to serve chicken salad sandwiches using mini croissants. Each committee member (24 people)
will have 2 sandwiches. The bakery sells 12 mini croissants for $8.00. How much will she spend on croissants?
Reference Solution
• Total sandwiches: 24 × 2 = 48
• Mini croissants needed: 48 ÷ 12 = 4 dozen
• Cost: 4 × 8 = 32. Final Answer: $32.00
Dialogue
Teacher: "Walk me through your solution."
Student: "I started by calculating how many sandwiches Margaret needs to make. Since there are 24 people on the
committee and each person needs 2 sandwiches, I multiplied 24 × 2 to get 48. Then I realized that each sandwich needs
2 mini croissants, so I multiplied 48 × 2 to get 96. Since the bakery offers 12 mini croissants for $8.00, I divided 96 by
12 to get 8 sets of 12 mini croissants. Finally, I multiplied 8 × $8.00 to get my final answer of $64.00."
Model

Generated Response

Score

LearnLM-simple

"That’s a fantastic approach to solving the problem! Your step-by-step calculations and clear reasoning demonstrate a strong understanding of how to break
down a word problem and solve it systematically." confirms incorrect answer
"Great job on breaking down the problem step by step! Your calculations are
correct, and you accurately determined that Margaret will spend $64.00 on
croissants."confirms incorrect answer
"It looks like you have a solid understanding of the problem. You correctly
calculated the total number of sandwiches needed and then determined how
many sets of mini croissants you need to buy. Your final answer is $64.00."
incorrect
"A dozen croissants cost $8.00 and she needs 4 dozens so that will cost 8*4 ="
telling part of the answer
"Calculate the total number of sandwiches needed: There are 24 people on the
committee. Each person needs 2 sandwiches. 24 × 2 = 48 sandwiches." telling
part of the correct answer
"How many sandwiches does Margaret need to make?" reiterate first step
"Great job breaking down the problem step by step! Can you explain how you
determined the total cost of the croissants based on the number of sets you
calculated?" ask to re-check
"That’s a great start! Can you explain why you decided to multiply 24 by 2 at
the beginning of your solution?" encourages to reflect and self-correct on the
exact error step
"You correctly calculated the total number of sandwiches needed. Now, how
many mini croissants does each sandwich require?" encourages to reflect and
self-correct on the exact error step

-5.09

GPT4o-simple
Qwen-Math-7bextended
Human Teacher
Qwen-Math-7b-simple
SocraticLM-simple
GPT4o-extended
LearnLM-extended
SocraticLM-extended

-4.25
-3.68

-1.91
-0.36
4.59
4.62
7.47
7.66

Table 6: Example scaffolding reward model scores. Red represents undesired teacher behavior, blue is neutral and
useful in some scenarios, and green represents following best scaffolding practices. Simple refers to the simple
prompt used in the caffolding Generation task and the extended version refers to the extended prompt used in
Pedagogical Instruction Following.

218

Expertise
1 Problem-Solving

2 Socratic Questioning

You are a helpful math tutor. Solve the question step-by-step.
Provide your final answer after 'Final answer'.
{{ shots }}
Question: {{question}}
Answer:

You are a helpful math tutor generating step-by-step questions.
Generate only a list of questions.
{{ shots }}
Problem: {{question}}
Questions:

Student Understanding
3 Student Solution Correctness

4 Mistake Location

You are an experienced math teacher. Your goal is to identify
the correctness of the Student's Solution to a Problem.
{{ shots }}
Problem: {{question}}
Conversation:
{{dialog_history}}
Student: {{student_chat_solution}}
Q: Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write 'Yes' if it is
incorrect, or 'No' if it is correct.
A:

You are an experienced math teacher. Your goal is to identify the
step of the first mistake in the Student's Solution to a Problem.
{{ shots }}
Problem: {{question}}
Student Solution: {{student_solution}}
Q: Is the Student Solution incorrect? Write only the step number
with the first error or 0 if no error is found.
A:

5 Mistake Correction
You are a helpful math tutor assisting a student. Given the following conversation and problem, provide a complete correct
solution. Make sure to show your work and state the final answer clearly after 'Final Answer:'.
Problem: {{question}}
Conversation:
{{dialog_history}}
Student: {{student_chat_solution}}
Teacher:
3 Pedagogy
Scaffolding Generation & Scaffolding Generation Hard

(simple prompt)

You are an experienced math teacher and you are going to respond to a student in a useful and caring way. The student is trying to
solve the following problem.
Problem: {{question}}
Conversation:
{{dialog_history}}
Teacher (maximum two sentences):
Pedagogical Instruction Following & Pedagogical Instruction Following Hard

(extended prompt)

Be a friendly, supportive tutor. Guide the student to meet their goals, gently nudging them on task if they stray. Ask guiding
questions to help your students take incremental steps toward understanding big concepts, and ask probing questions to help them
dig deep into those ideas. Pose just one question per conversation turn so you don't overwhelm the student. Wrap up this
conversation once the student has shown evidence of understanding.
Problem: {{question}}
Conversation:
{{dialog_history}}
Teacher (maximum two sentences):

Figure 5: Exact prompts for each task.

219

Judge the pedagogical quality of the responses provided by two teachers. Focus on the quality of the guidance, not
revealing of the answer and actionability of the feedback. Be as objective as possible. After providing your explanation,
output your final verdict by strictly following this format: "[[A]]" or "[[B]]".
Problem: {problem}
Reference Solution: {solution}
{conversation}
[The Start of Response A]
{responseA}
[The End of Response A]
[The Start of Response B]
{responseB}
[The End of Response B ]

Figure 6: A simple baseline prompt is used in LLM-as-a-judge and preference reward models.

Judge the pedagogical quality of the responses provided by two teachers. Focus on the quality of the scaffolding
guidance, correctness, and actionability of the feedback through nudges, questions, and hints. Do not give high scores
for revealing the full answer.
Problem: {problem}
Reference Solution: {solution}
{conversation}
Teacher: {utterance_to_score}

Figure 7: Extended prompt used by the reward models, LLM-as-a-judge, and preference-tuned reward models.
{problem} and {solution} are placeholders for the text of the problem and a reference solution (if available).
{conversation} represents a dialog history and {utterance_to_score} is a teacher utterance which is being assessed.
For LLM-as-a-judge, two utterances are listed the same way as in Figure 6.

220

Quartile

Example

Top (75th)

You made a good try. While rounding the nearest hundred, we
have to look at the tens place first. Is the value in the tens place
below 5?
Your answer is a little bit off. There are 4 points in this graph.
The x-axis moves on the graph horizontally or right to left. What
direction does the y-axis move on the graph?
That is great! +1 point for your effort. The division is the part of
the question. What is the dividend?

Mid (25-75th)

Very good try! 1 day = ___ hours.
That was a good try. Plus 1 point. Let me explain it to you. Here,
we have to find the value of 10 divided by 5.
You got an incorrect answer. Let me show you. The area of the top
rectangle is 10. Add the areas of the two sections together. The
final answer is 45 square feet. Did you understand?
That’s a good try. Multiplication is also called repeated addition.

Bottom (25th)

Your answer is incorrect. The volume is 70 cubic units. Does the
step make sense?
Incorrect answer [STUDENT], but good try.
That was a good try.

Table 7: Examples of reward model scores for novice teacher responses from the test set, categorized into quartiles.

221

