OlympiadBench: A Challenging Benchmark for Promoting AGI with
Olympiad-Level Bilingual Multimodal Scientific Problems
Chaoqun He1 , Renjie Luo2 , Yuzhuo Bai1 , Shengding Hu1 , Zhen Leng Thai1
Junhao Shen1 , Jinyi Hu1 , Xu Han1∗ , Yujie Huang1 , Yuxiang Zhang3
Jie Liu3 , Lei Qi3 , Zhiyuan Liu1 * , Maosong Sun1
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
3

Wisdom Way AI Lab, China

{hcq21,byz22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, renjie.luo@outlook.com, {hanxu2022,liuzy}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

arXiv:2402.14008v2 [cs.CL] 6 Jun 2024

Recent advancements have seen Large Language Models (LLMs) and Large Multimodal
Models (LMMs) surpassing general human capabilities in various tasks, approaching the proficiency level of human experts across multiple
domains. With traditional benchmarks becoming less challenging for these models, new rigorous challenges are essential to gauge their
advanced abilities. In this work, we present
OlympiadBench, an Olympiad-level bilingual
multimodal scientific benchmark, featuring
8,476 problems from Olympiad-level mathematics and physics competitions, including the
Chinese college entrance exam. Each problem is detailed with expert-level annotations
for step-by-step reasoning. Evaluating top-tier
models on OlympiadBench, we implement a
comprehensive assessment methodology to accurately evaluate model responses. Notably,
the best-performing model, GPT-4V, attains an
average score of 17.97% on OlympiadBench,
with a mere 10.74% in physics, highlighting
the benchmark rigor and the intricacy of physical reasoning. Our analysis orienting GPT4V points out prevalent issues with hallucinations, knowledge omissions, and logical fallacies. We hope that our challenging benchmark can serve as a valuable resource for helping future AGI research endeavors. The data
and evaluation code are available at https:
//github.com/OpenBMB/OlympiadBench

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across various tasks
such as text generation (Zhao et al., 2023), code
generation (Zan et al., 2023) and mathematical reasoning (Lu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023), garnering significant attention from both academia
and industry (Wei et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2023;
Bubeck et al., 2023). The most powerful models
* Corresponding authors: Xu Han and Zhiyuan Liu.

Question: Find all triples (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) of positive integers such that 𝑥 ≤ 𝑦 ≤
𝑧 and 𝑥 ! 𝑦 ! + 𝑧 ! = 2012 𝑥𝑦𝑧 + 2 .
Solution: First note that 𝑥 divides 2012 ⋅ 2 = 2! ⋅ 503. If 503 ∣ 𝑥 then the
right-hand side of the equation is divisible by 503! , and it
follows that 503" ∣ 𝑥𝑦𝑧 + 2. This is false as 503 ∣ 𝑥. Hence
𝑥 = 2# with 𝑚 ∈ {0,1,2,3}. If 𝑚 ≥ 2 then 2$ ∣ 2012(𝑥𝑦𝑧 + 2).
However the highest powers of 2 dividing 2012 and 𝑥𝑦𝑧 + 2 =
2# 𝑦𝑧 + 2 are 2" and 2% respectively. So 𝑥 = 1 or 𝑥 = 2,
yielding the two equations
𝑦 ! + 𝑧 ! = 2012 𝑦𝑧 + 2 ,
𝑦 ! + 𝑧 ! = 503 𝑦𝑧 + 1
In both cases …… It follows that 𝑦 ≡ −𝑧(𝑚𝑜𝑑 503 ) as
claimed. Therefore 𝑦 + 𝑧 = 503𝑘 with 𝑘 ≥ 1. In view of 𝑦 ! +
𝑧 ! = 𝑦 + 𝑧 ( 𝑦 − 𝑧 " + 𝑦𝑧) the two equations take the form
𝑘 𝑦 − 𝑧 " + 𝑘 − 4 𝑦𝑧 = 8
𝑘 𝑦 − 𝑧 " + 𝑘 − 1 𝑦𝑧 = 1

(1)
(2)

In (1) we have 𝑘 − 4 𝑦𝑧 ≤ 8, which implies k ≤ 4 ……
Therefore (1) has no integer solutions.
Equation (2) implies 0 ≤ 𝑘 − 1 𝑦𝑧 ≤ 1, so that 𝑘 = 1 or 𝑘 = 2.
Also 0 ≤ 𝑘 𝑦 − 𝑧 " ≤ 1, hence 𝑘 = 2 only if 𝑦 = 𝑧. However
then 𝑦 = 𝑧 = 1, which is false in view of 𝑦 + 𝑧 ≥ 503.
Therefore 𝑘 = 1 and (2) takes the form 𝑦 − 𝑧 " = 1, yielding
𝑧 − 𝑦 = 𝑦 − 𝑧 = 1. Combined with 𝑘 = 1 and 𝑦 + 𝑧 = 503𝑘,
this leads to 𝑦 = 251, 𝑧 = 252.
In summary the triple (2,251,252) is the only solution.
Final answer: 2,251,252
Answer type: Tuple

Subfield: Number theory
Question type: Open-ended

Figure 1: An example of IMO in OlympiadBench. Solving this example requires AI systems to span different
mathematical domains and conduct advanced reasoning.

such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023a) and Gemini Ultra (Team, 2023) have even surpassed oridinary
human level on a wide variety of benchmarks such
as MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020), MMMU (Yue
et al., 2023), and even surpassing human expert in
many area. These results show a promising future
that LLMs can serve as proficient assistants for human scientists (Nguyen, 2023; Qiu et al., 2023).
Among the array of expert-level skills exhibited by
LLMs, scientific reasoning consistently emerges
as one of the most brilliant, showcasing some of
the most distinguished intellectual properties that
experts possess. Therefore, this paper primarily
focuses on mathematical and physical reasoning.
In recent years, several benchmarks related to
mathematics have been proposed, such as the

dataset GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) as well as
the dataset MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021). However, these benchmarks, are primarily developed
before the advent of highly capable LLMs, and now
lack sufficient challenge for the latest models. For
instance, GPT-4 with prompting techniques(Zhou
et al., 2023) has achieved a 97.0% success rate on
GSM8K and 84.3% on MATH. The rapid evolution of LLMs may soon lead to saturated results
on these benchmarks. Concurrently, LLMs are
not yet fully equipped to assist mathematicians in
solving complex problems (Collins et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023), nor are they capable of performing expert-level mathematical reasoning independently. This discrepancy underscores the need
for more challenging datasets to benchmark future
advancements of LLMs in this domain. Similarly,
physics presents comparable challenges for AI to
those found in mathematics. Nevertheless, existing benchmarks related to physics (Lu et al., 2022;
Arora et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024) are characterized by their relatively low difficulty and limited
scope. There is also a significant lack of a rigorous
and challenging benchmark in physics.
In addition to the issue regarding the benchmark
difficulty, it is important to note that these benchmarks predominantly focus on text. This presents a
significant limitation, as a wide range of scientific
reasoning contexts require multimodal reasoning
abilities. For example, grasping geometry reasoning in mathematics or understanding experiments
designs in physics are scenarios where multimodal
reasoning capabilities are crucial. Notably, various
large multimodal models (LMMs) have been developed (Team, 2023; Liu et al., 2023) and demonstrate proficiency on a variety of tasks (Lu et al.,
2022; Yue et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b; Lu et al.,
2024), offering the potential for multimodal scientific reasoning. Nevertheless, there is still a lack
of sufficient benchmarks to prove whether these
LMMs are capable of handling scientific problems.
Consequently, a challenging multimodal benchmark is essential for advancing scientific reasoning
tasks(Zhang et al., 2024a; Lu et al., 2023).
To address the aforementioned inadequacies,
we introduce OlympiadBench, an Olympiad-level
bilingual multimodal scientific benchmark. This
collection comprises 8,476 math and physics problems sourced from International Olympiads, Chinese Olympiads, and the most challenging segments of the Chinese College Entrance Exam
(GaoKao). We download PDF data from official

websites and utilize Mathpix1 for OCR parsing. We
meticulously inspect, clean, and revise the data, and
further adopt LLMs for deduplication. Finally, we
annotate the data with crucial information such as
answer types and subfields, yielding a dataset that
is clean, accurate, and detailed. As shown in Figure 1, OlympiadBench features numerous distinct
characteristics such as difficulty, free-form generation, expert-level solution annotation, detailed
labeling of difficulty, wide-coverage of modality
and language, etc. These features are summarized
more clearly from Table 1.
We conduct an evaluation of current state-of-theart LLMs and LMMs on the OlympiadBench. The
best-performing model, GPT-4V, is a multimodal
version of GPT-4 developed by OpenAI that can
understand images. Despite its advanced capabilities, GPT-4V achieves a score of only 17.97% on
OlympiadBench, with individual scores of 21.70%
in mathematics and 10.74% in physics.
Importantly, the experiment results show that
LMMs still struggle in computational error, incorrect reasoning or induction. For the process involved in the correct responses, the process occasionally includes hallucinated reasoning, or choosing a more complex solution when a simpler solution exists. All these results highlight the substantial challenge OlympiadBench presents to contemporary large models and point the direction of
future efforts.
OlympiadBench is inspired by the significant advances made by DeepMind AlphaGeometry (Trinh
et al., 2024), which nearly matches the proficiency
of International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO)
gold medalists in geometry proofs. It is clear
that OlympiadBench, along with other challenging
datasets like the AI-MO challenge2 , will witness
and benchmark the swift progress towards expertlevel AI assistants for solving scientific problems.

2

Related Work

This section gives an overview of the existing
datasets in solving mathematics and physics problems as well as multimodal datasets.
Mathematics Benchmarks. Solving mathematics problems and proving theorems in natural languages has been a key research focus in machine
learning and natural language processing since
the 1960s (Bobrow et al., 1964). Previous bench1
2

https://mathpix.com/
https://aimoprize.com/

marks (Koncel-Kedziorski et al., 2016; Wang et al.,
2017; Ling et al., 2017; Amini et al., 2019; Cobbe
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2023) focus predominantly
on math word problems (WMPs) which involve
four basic arithmetic operations with single or multiple operation steps (Lu et al., 2023). Typically,
the GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) dataset targets
elementary-level questions within 8 steps of basic
arithmetic operations. However, these problems are
typically text-only (Lu et al., 2023) and of lower
difficulty, with reasoning limited to a few computations. As the complexity of the problems rises,
some works (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Frieder et al.,
2023; Arora et al., 2023) introduce competitionlevel problems integrating mathematical logic and
background knowledge. Yet, these challenging
datasets are increasingly being surmounted (Zhou
et al., 2023). Theorem proving is a problem to
demonstrate the truth of a mathematical claim (a
theorem) through a sequence of logical arguments
(a proof) (Lu et al., 2023). Earlier efforts mainly
focused on translating natural language proofs into
formal representations, facing significant expertise
and labor challenges (Zheng et al., 2022; Welleck
et al., 2021). The emergence of LLMs has facilitated notable advancements in the domain of natural language proof (Jiang et al., 2023). OlympiadBench presents mathematical reasoning and theoretical proofs all in natural language with detailed
solution annotations.
Physics Benchmarks. Physics questions in
SciQ (Welbl et al., 2017), ScienceQA (Lu et al.,
2022) and E-EVAL (Hou et al., 2024) are mainly
elementary and high school level multiple-choice
questions, lacking complex reasoning and computational tasks. In MMLU-STEM (Hendrycks et al.,
2020) and C-Eval-STEM (Huang et al., 2023),
physics questions also adopt a multiple-choice format. JEEBench (Arora et al., 2023) extends this
format to include multistep reasoning with physics
knowledge, yet it is limited in scope and purely
text-only. TheoremQA (Chen et al., 2023) is the
first theorem-driven question-answering dataset.
Curated by domain experts, it contains 800 highquality questions that encompass 350 theorems
from Mathematics, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EE&CS), and Finance.
SciEval (Sun et al., 2023) consists of a total of
about 18,000 challenging scientific questions, spanning three important basic science fields: chemistry,
physics and biology. SciBench (Wang et al., 2024)
and OCWCourses (Lewkowycz et al., 2022) of-

fer college-level physics questions in free-response
formats, where SciBench contains multimodal information. In contrast, OlympiadBench escalates
in difficulty, diversifies in question types, and surpasses in volume, setting a new benchmark for
complexity and variety in the domain.
Multimodal Benchmarks.
For assessing
multimodal capability, works such as Geometry3K (Lu et al., 2021), GeoQA (Chen et al.,
2021), GeoQA+ (Cao and Xiao, 2022), and UniGeo (Chen et al., 2022) have employed multimodal
information for tackling geometric problems, integrating natural language descriptions with diagrams. ScienceQA (Lu et al., 2022), MMMU (Yue
et al., 2023), CMMMU (Zhang et al., 2024b) and
CMMU (He et al., 2024) are multimodal, multidiscipline evaluation sets, encompassing a broad
range of subjects. MathVista (Lu et al., 2024) integrates 28 existing and 3 newly constructed multimodal datasets involving mathematics, aiming to
establish a benchmark that encapsulates challenges
from a variety of mathematical and visual tasks.
However, it does not concentrate on delving into
the complexity of mathematics problems.
In summary, we introduce a new benchmark to
address these gaps. Table 1 presents a comparison
between OlympiadBench and several related benchmarks, highlighting the significant advantages of
OlympiadBench across all aspects.

3

The OlympiadBench Dataset

To evaluate the reasoning abilities of LLMs and
LMMs in mathematics and physics problems, we
have created OlympiadBench, a bilingual and multimodal scientific benchmark at the competition
level. This section provides a detailed account of
the construction process of OlympiadBench. Summarized statistics of the dataset is shown in Table
2, and more detailed statistics are in Appendix A.2.
3.1

Design Principle

The motivation behind OlympiadBench is to establish a benchmark that represents the pinnacle of human intellectual achievement, thereby encouraging
researchers of large models to push the boundaries
of mathematical and physical reasoning capabilities. We focus on curating challenges that epitomize the highest level of competition worldwide.
Specifically, OlympiadBench includes:
1. Inclusion of Olympiad-Level Problems. We
collect mathematics and physics problems

Benchmark

Subject
Multi- Detailed Difficulty
Size
Maths Physics modal solution
level
Maths Physics

SciBench
MMMU
MathVista
ScienceQA
SciEval
JEEBench
MMLU
AGIEval
GSM8K
MATH

✓
✓
✓

OlympiadBench

✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

✓
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓

✓
✓

COL
COL
H
CEE
COL
CEE
E
COMP

236
948
953
1,319
5,000

✓

COMP

6,142

✓

✓

217
540
1,000

295
443
617
1,657
123
548
200

2,334

Answer
type

Language Question
type
type

Num
Num
Num

Num
Num
Num,Exp,Tup

EN
EN
EN
EN
EN
EN
EN
EN,ZH
EN
EN

OE
MC,OE
MC,OE
MC
MC,FB,J
MC,OE
MC
MC,FB,OE
OE
OE

ALL

EN,ZH

OE

Num
Num

Table 1: For difficulty level, COMP: Competition, COL: College, CEE: College Entrance Examination, H: High
School, E: Elementary School, and we picked the highest level; For answer type, Num: Numeric value, Exp:
Expression, Equ: Equation, Int: Interval, Tup: Tuple; For language type, EN: English, ZH: Chinese; For question
type, OE: Open-ended, MC: Multiple-choice, FB: Fill-in-the-blank, J: Judgement. For the statistical analysis of
quantity and relevant metrics in AGIEval, we exclude 1,000 questions from the MATH benchmark to facilitate a
more accurate comparison. The “-” indicates that it cannot be confirmed. Upon comparison, OlympiadBench leads
in all aspects.

Statistics
Total Problems
* Problems with images
* Problems with solutions
Difficulties (CEE: COMP)
EN: ZH
Open-ended Questions
Theorem Proving
Math: Physics
* Maths with images
* Physics with images
Average question tokens
Max question tokens
Average solution tokens
Max solution tokens

Number
8,476
4,869 (57%)
8,476 (100%)
66%: 34%
2,125: 6,351
6,728 (79%)
1,748 (21%)
6,142: 2,334
2,911
1,958
253
3,745
347
4,223

Table 2: Statistics of OlympiadBench. When calculating
tokens, images are not included.

without a specialized background in mathematics, each problem is accompanied by expertly crafted solutions that detail the reasoning steps involved. This approach can not only
reduces the difficulty of annotation and evaluation but also enhances the accuracy of the solutions provided. Furthermore, detailed expertlevel solutions are valuable for research in
model reasoning.
3. Incorporation of Visuals. Recognizing the
crucial role of visual information in conveying
complex ideas, OlympiadBench incorporates
problems that require understanding images,
identifying spatial relationships, and other advanced reasoning tasks. This inclusion aims to
assess the model’s capabilities in interpreting
visual data as part of its reasoning process.

from the International Olympiad competitions, which cater to the most outstanding
high school students in a region. These problems are open-ended, differing from traditional multiple-choice or fill-in-the-blank formats. This selection aims to more accurately
reflect the complexity of advanced scientific
reasoning, providing insight into the actual
reasoning process of the models.

4. Minimization of Data Leakage Risks. To
minimize the risk of data leakage, we have
sourced problems from official Olympiad
competitions, converting them from their original PDF files provided by official websites
to the markdown format required. This strategy is aimed at reducing the likelihood of the
data being inadvertently incorporated into the
pre-training corpora of models.

2. Provision of Detailed Solutions. Given the
advanced difficulty of these problems, which
may exceed the comprehension of individuals

Through these carefully designed criteria,
OlympiadBench aims to not only challenge but
also significantly advance the capabilities of

models in mathematical and physical reasoning.
3.2

Data Processing

The data processing pipeline is structured into three
distinct phases: data collection, format conversion
& deduplication, and classification labeling.
Data Collection. OlympiadBench is meticulously compiled from three primary sources:
Global Mathematics and Physics Olympiad Problems, Regional and National Chinese Math Competitions, and Gaokao Mock Questions for Mathematics and Physics 3 . Each chosen for its distinct
advantages in creating a robust and comprehensive benchmark for evaluating LLMs and LMMs in
mathematical and scientific reasoning. Their challenges progressively increase in difficulty, not only
distinguishing the reasoning capabilities of models of various sizes but also offering guidance on
scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020) for specialized
models in these domains.
Format Conversion and Deduplication. After collecting all PDF files, we utilize the Mathpix tool for OCR recognition and convert them
into markdown format. However, no conversion
process is flawless, necessitating manual verification by our team members between the original
PDF files and the converted Markdown texts. The
Markdown texts are further structured into a format
akin to "Problem—Solution—Answer", employing
its markup language for text organization. Subsequently, we leverage a specialized small-scale
language model 4 trained on mathematical symbol
corpora for vectorizing the data and performing
deduplication based on cosine similarity.
Classification Labeling. We note that both
mathematics and physics problems predominantly
comprise two types of questions: the open-ended
problems and the theorem proving problems. We
also note that the dataset, enriched by both
Olympiad and national examination questions, covers a broad spectrum of subfields, as illustrated in
Figure 2. Therefore, we manually annotate each
question with topic and problem type annotations.
3.3

Data Characteristics

In contrast to previous benchmarks, OlympiadBench unveils two unique characteristics within
its dataset: the incorporation of Progressive Prob3

Clean and correct college entrance exams as well as mock
questions from Wisdom Way AI Lab.
4
https://huggingface.co/Laurie/
Bloom1b7-deepspeed-chat-Chinese-math

Physics-COMP&CEE (2,334):
Mechanics, Electromagnetism,
Thermodynamics,
Optics, Modern Physics

Maths-COMP (2,133):
Combinatorics, Algebra,
Number Theory, Geometry

Maths-CEE (4,009):
Derivative, Conic Sections,
Sequence, Trigonometric
Functions, Set Theory, Logic,
Elementary Functions,
Inequality, Polar Coordinates
and Parametric Equations,
Probability and Statistics,
Plane Geometry, Solid
Geometry, Complex Numbers

Figure 2: Subfields Distribution of OlympiadBench

Answer type
Numeric
Expression
Equation
Tuple
Interval

Example
1/4
x = (1/2)at2
x2 + y 2 = 1
(x, y, z) = (0, 0, 0)
(−∞, −1) ∪ (1, +∞)

Table 3: Examples of the five answer types

lems in Physics and the categorization of answers
to most open-ended questions into a limited number of types.
Progressive Problems in Physics. In physics
competitions such as the International Physics
Olympiad (IPhO), problems are often structured
around a common material or scenario, with subsequent questions potentially relying on the answers
or information from previous questions. One example is given in Figure 10 and Figure 11. This design
characteristic is commonly referred to as "progressive problems". By linking a series of questions together, progressive problems require participants to
apply their knowledge and skills comprehensively
to gradually solve more complex issues. This type
of question design aims to test students’ depth of
understanding, application capabilities, and innovative thinking, rather than just basic knowledge. To
better utilize this feature, we compile the material,
questions, and their answers into the ’context’ field
for each set of progressive problems.
Answer Type Classification. Whether in mathematics or physics, the answers to problem requiring

definitive response can largely be categorized into
the following types: numeric, expression, equation,
interval, and tuple. Simple examples of these can
be seen in Table 3.
3.4

Automatic Scoring Pipeline

We design an automated scoring pipeline (see Algorithm 1) to evaluate model-generated answers
across complex fields like mathematics and physics,
where answers vary from numbers to equations.
This method simplifies answers into two categories:
numeric values, handled through floating-point operations, and symbolic expressions, requiring symbolic computation.
For equations, we ensure all terms are on one
side before dividing to check for mathematical
equivalence. Intervals and tuples are compared by
extracting and evaluating each element. Numeric
answers are verified against a small tolerance of
error, defaulting to 1e-8 but adjustable for physics
problems to allow for a specific error margin. For
expressions, we use the SymPy5 library to confirm
if the subtraction of two expressions approaches
zero, indicating correctness.

prompt template for English and Chinese openended questions is shown in the figure 3. To ensure
the most complete extraction of the model’s final
results, we explicitly prescribe the types and formats of the answers in the prompt to promote the
accuracy of the machine’s automatic scoring. In
order to test the native mathematical and physical
abilities of the models, the prompts used in the test
do not introduce knowledge points and other extra information contained in the dataset, but this
information can be applied in subsequent research.
Note that deepseek-math-7B-RL (Shao et al., 2024)
requires the addition of a specific chain-of-thought
prompt at the end of the input, which we adhered
to during the evaluation.
4.1.2

Evaluation Workflow

4

Experiments

We first apply each model to generate answers for
questions in OlympiadBench using prompts formed
by prompt template, with open-source models running on NVIDIA A800 GPUs. Then, we run the
automatic scoring pipeline to judge the correctness
of the answers as described in subsection 3.4. Finally, we calculate the micro-average accuracy as
the comparing metric. The code of the whole workflow is provided in the supplementary material.

4.1

Settings

4.2

We conduct evaluations of open-source and closedsourced LMMs that have been selected with consideration of their comprehensive capabilities on
OlympiadBench. At the same time, we have selected LLMs with strong mathematical and logical
abilities for evaluation on text-only questions.
As no accurate automatic evaluation method for
theorem proving exists, we run full experiment on
the automatic-scoring-available open-ended problems with answer type included in the Table 3,
which is discussed in this section. We do manual
sampling check of GPT-4V for theorem proving
problems with analysis reported at Section 5.1.
4.1.1

Prompts

We evaluate the models in a zero-shot setting. Due
to the high difficulty of the OlympiadBench questions, there should be considerable randomness in
the results when using small batch data as the validation set, so we directly use a specific prompt template for all models instead of conducting promptengineering for each model respectively. The
5

https://www.sympy.org

Baselines

In our study, we evaluate the performance of current leading bilingual large multimodal models
(LMMs), as well as bilingual large language models (LLMs) that has strong mathematical and reasoning abilities. We take both open- and closedsource models into consideration, using either the
largest and latest released checkpoints or the bestperforming official APIs available.
For LMMs, we select GPT-4V(GPT-4Vision)
(OpenAI,
2023b),
Gemini-ProVision (Team, 2023), Qwen-VL-Max (Bai
et al., 2023) for closed-source models, while YiVL-34B (01-ai, 2024) and LLaVA-NeXT-34B (Liu
et al., 2024) for open-source models. For models
that demand compulsory image input, we take
their LMM counterpart (corresponding text-model
API or base LLM) for evaluation. Specifically,
for LLaVA-NeXT-34B, we use its base LLM,
Nous-Hermes-2-Yi-34B (NousResearch, 2023).
The text model corresponding to Yi-VL-34B is
Yi-34B-Chat (01-ai, 2023). Similarly, for the
Gemini-Pro-Vision, we utilize the Gemini-Pro
API interface. To examine the impact of replacing
LMM with base LLM for processing text-only

以下是中国<subject>竞赛中的解答题。

The following is a question from an International <subject> competition.
-

Single answer of the type “tuple”

The answer of the question should be <ans_type>.

答案类型为<ans_type>。

Single answer

The question has multiple answers, each of them should be <ans_type>.

Multiple answers of single type

题目有多个答案，答案类型均为<ans_type>。

The question has multiple answers, with the answers in order being
<ans_type>, …<ans_type>.

Multiple answers of the same type

题目有多个答案，答案类型分别为<ans_type>、…<ans_type>。
请根据题目的要求和所提供的信息计算得出答案。解答过程和结果中使
用的变量和公式请使用LaTeX格式表示。
请在最后以

Please calculate the answer according to the given requirements and the
information provided. Please use LaTeX format to represent the variables and
formulas used in the solution process and results. Please end your solution with
“So the final answer is \boxed{answer}.”

Single answer

“So the final answer is \boxed{multiple answers connected with commas}.”

Multiple answers

“所以最终答案是\boxed{答案}。”
“所以最终答案是\boxed{用英⽂逗号连接的多个答案}。”
显式给出结果。

and give the result explicitly.

Figure 3: The template of the construction of the prompt for English(left) and Chinese(right) open-ended questions,
among which <subject>, <ans_type>, and whether there are multiple answers can all be obtained from the data
items in OlympiadBench dataset.

data, we subsequently compare the performance
differences between GPT-4V and GPT-4 6 on
text-only questions in OlympiadBench.
For LLMs, we select DeepSeekMath-7BRL (Shao et al., 2024) as the primary baseline for
text-only questions, and report the results of the
selected LMMs (or their LLM counterparts) on the
text-only questions for comparison, and additionally evaluate GPT-4 as described above.
4.3

Main Results

The overall experiment result is shown in table 4.
Based on the results, our key findings can be summarized as the following:
OlympiadBench is more challenging than existing benchmarks, which provides new perspective to compare LMMs. As shown in table 7, the most advanced model only achieves an
average accuracy of 17.97% on OlympiadBench,
which is much lower than that of existing benchmarks. Moreover, the gap between the models has
been widened, thereby becoming more significant,
which helps people to compare the differences in
capabilities between different models more accurately.
There still exists a huge difference between
the most powerful closed-source models and
open-source models, but a large model size is
needed. The average accuracy of GPT-4V is
more than 5 times larger than the best-performing
open-source model (Yi-VL-34B). But Gemini-ProVision, being closed-source models of the secondtier size, is much less compatible on complicated
tasks such as OlympiadBench, for it achieves an
average accuracy that is only slightly higher than
open-source model.
6

The version of GPT-4 is "0125-preview" and GPT-4V is
"1106-vision-preview".

The challenge lies more on question-withimages, Physics and none-English text. The
model performance on text-only questions is significantly above average, showing the challenging spirit of multi-modal questions. Meanwhile,
Physics questions, especially Physics questions
with images, are more challenging than math questions, as they require knowledge of the laws of
Physics as well as other world knowledge besides
mathematical abilities such as calculation and reasoning. Moreover, LMMs with a focus on bilingual
image-text training data, such as Qwen-VL-Max
and Yi-VL-34B, perform better on Chinese questions then English questions.
Open source LLMs is catching at fast speed
in the area of maths and physics. Although
with a relatively small size, DeepSeekMath-7BRL outperforms or is on par with Gemini-ProVision and Qwen-VL-Max on the text-only part
of OlympiadBench, especially in Math problems,
showing promising future of open-source model of
pre-training and fine-tuning on fine-grained mathematical and reasoning data.
Multi-modal training slightly hurts performance on text-only math and physics tasks,
but may also bring some improvement. The
text-only version GPT-4 performs slightly better
on all datasets of OlympiadBench, except for the
En_COMP dataset. We hypothesis that the improvement in the En_COMP dataset shows an enhancement of long-context text reasoning capabilities, which is discussed in Appendix B.2.

5

Analysis

In this section, we conduct analysis on the GPT4V’s answers of specific open-ended questions that
have been sampled, as well as giving preliminary

Models
LLaVA-NeXT-34B†
Yi-VL-34B†
Gemini-Pro-Vision
Qwen-VL-Max
GPT-4V

En_COMP
3.98
4.22
6.92
10.68
27.18

LLaVA-NeXT-34B
Yi-VL-34B
DeepSeekMath-7B-RL
Gemini-Pro-Vision
Qwen-VL-Max
GPT-4V
GPT-4

4.15
4.45
19.44
7.57
11.57
28.93
30.42

Maths
Zh_COMP Zh_CEE
Avg.
2.60
4.64
4.30
3.68
4.31
4.23
2.59
5.05*
5.14
13.21*
13.08
12.65
14.87
21.27
21.70
Experiment with text-only
2.94
8.55
6.29
3.68
8.06
6.24
2.70
22.42
18.09
2.94
9.20*
7.63
14.29
25.89
19.70
15.93
37.10
31.01
16.42
37.98
32.00

-

En_COMP
1.36
0.91
3.19*
3.76*
11.42

Physics
Zh_CEE
2.32
1.64
2.12
5.64*
10.45

Avg.
2.08
1.46
2.45
5.09
10.74

3.65
3.42
4.22
10.09
17.97

-

2.12
0.85
6.78
4.66
4.24
12.71
12.29

5.22
5.22
16.52
6.96
18.26
23.48
24.35

3.13
2.28
9.97
5.41
8.83
16.24
16.24

5.87
5.72
17.02
7.34
18.27
29.07
29.93

Avg.

Table 4: Experimental results. En_COMP: COMP problems in English, Zh_COMP: COMP problems in Chinese,
Zh_CEE: CEE problems in Chinese. For closed-source models, the responses for some problems are not available,
we mark the results with * (all of the proportion of missing answers are less than 1%, except for the result of
Qwen-VL-Max in Physics-En_COMP, where 26 questions exceed maximum input length). The causes are further
described in Appendix B.3. Moreover, LLaVA-NeXT-34B and Yi-VL-34B only accepts input with single image, we
mark results from only one image input with †.

examination of theorem proving questions.
5.1

Examination of Theorem Proving
Questions

For GPT-4V, we do manual sampling check to evaluate the mathematical theorem proving questions.
In the questions drawn according to the knowledge
point distribution, GPT-4V only answers 6 out of
81 questions correctly in Math-Zh_COMP, all of
which are relatively simple and classic conclusions
(e.g. AM-GM inequality), or involved only simple computational derivations, and was basically
unable to complete the proof within the token limitation in Math-En_COMP, indicating that existing
models still cannot effectively solve lengthy reasoning and proofs, which is consistent with the
conclusions in existing papers (Trinh et al., 2024).
In solving proof problems, GPT-4V exposes several important issues, including: inability to fully
utilize image information (figure 9 as an example);
tending to make mistakes in simplifying and transforming algebraic expressions; proposing simple,
basic incorrect conclusions;struggling with classification discussions, etc. Detailed examples can be
found in the Appendix C.
5.2

Mistake Analysis of GPT-4V

We manually sample and check 97 maths (55
for English and 42 for Chinese) and 67 physics
Olympiad-level open-ended problems that GPT-

Incorrect Judging, 1%

Question Misunderstanding, 2%

Question Misunderstanding, 6%
Value Calc Error, 0%

Unfinished Answering, 1%

Insufficient
Classification
Discussions
25%
Unfinished
Answering
8%
Conclusion
Hallucination
1%

Value
Calc
Error Expression
7% .
Calc Error
10% .

Logical Reasoning /
Induction Error
45%

Mathematical Open-Ended Problems

Incorrect
Judging
12%
Introducing
Unnecessary
Variables or
Concepts, 12%

Expression
Calc Error
27%

Logical Reasoning Error /
Conceptual Confusion
42%

Physical Open-Ended Problems

Figure 4: Distribution of the error occurring in GPT4V’s solving process of 164 sampled Olympic-level
open-ended problems.

4V fails, and analyze the type of mistakes, the
overall results are shown in figure 4. In maths
problems, the typical errors of GPT-4V include:
insufficient classification discussion, especially in
combinatorial problems; poor performance in problems requiring large calculations (e.g. conic curve
problems), manifests as a lack of logic in the calculation process, resulting in the model being unable
to provide a reasonable answer. However, we also
found that GPT-4V has strong abilities in solving
quadratic equations and derivative problems. In
physics problems, GPT-4V tends to fall in conceptual confusion, or introduce unnecessary variables or concepts, but its capability to simplify and
transform algebraic expressions is stronger than
in purely mathematical situations, with nearly no
numerical calculation errors.

6

Discussion and Future Work

Here, we discuss the automated evaluation of theorem problems and the future research directions in
advanced disciplines.
Evaluation of Theorem’s Proof Problems. The
inability to automatically evaluate theorem’s proof
problems remains a significant challenge today.
Currently, mainstream methods for the automatic
evaluation of proofs require formalization, necessitating domain expertise and background knowledge. Exploring how to automatically evaluate
natural language proofs represents an important research direction. Our dataset includes expert-level
comprehensive annotations in a fusion of natural
language and LaTeX formats, making it a highquality resource for research in natural language
proof problems and fostering further development.
Expansion of Disciplines. Mathematics, much
like physics, serves as a litmus test for artificial
intelligence, requiring a strong foundational knowledge, rigorous high-level computations, and precise
logical reasoning. Currently, large models still face
significant challenges in mathematics and physics,
which are critical hurdles that must be overcome
for the development of AGI. In our future work, we
will integrate additional fields such as geography,
biology, and chemistry to provide a more innovative and comprehensive evaluation of a model’s
reasoning capabilities.

7

Conclusion

We create OlympiadBench, an Olympiad-level
bilingual multimodal scientific benchmark to assess the capabilities of large models in mathematics
and physics reasoning. Each problem is detailed
with expert-level annotations for step-by-step reasoning. In our benchmarking, we provide a detailed analysis of model performance, pinpointing
prevalent error types and potential areas for enhancement. This significant and challenging effort
fills a notable void, and we intend to open-source
the benchmark to advance AGI and scientific reasoning research. Future efforts will focus on gathering more challenging questions and broadening
the range of subjects to further develop rigorous
scientific benchmarks.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Key
R&D Program of China (No.2022ZD0116312), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.

62236004), Quan Cheng Laboratory (Grant No.
QCLZD202301) and Institute Guo Qiang at Tsinghua University.

Ethical Considerations
In this paper, we introduce OlympiadBench, a
highly challenging bilingual, multimodal scientific benchmark aimed at evaluating the mathematical and physical reasoning of large models
now and AGI in the future. The paper outlines
the dataset construction, including data gathering,
OCR processing, cleansing, deduplication, and detailed annotation. OlympiadBench’s data, derived
exclusively from official sources, substantially reduces the likelihood of pre-training data leakage.
We offer precise annotations for each problem
and have implemented an exhaustive evaluation
script for more accurate model performance assessment. Additionally, being bilingual and providing
expert-level reasoning annotations for every question, OlympiadBench serves as a crucial resource
for propelling AGI’s prowess in scientific reasoning. Committed to environmental sustainability,
we intend to release the dataset and accompanying
scripts publicly to cut down on unnecessary carbon footprint. In experiments, we comply with all
licenses for models and data.

Limitations
In pursuit of understanding the logical reasoning
abilities of LLMs and LMMs within the multimodal domains of mathematics and physics, we
develop OlympiadBench, a challenging bilingual
multimodal scientific benchmark. Despite filling
a notable void, this work acknowledges inherent
limitations. First, in the OlympiadBench, some
questions feature answers that require categorical
discussions or textual descriptions, such as proofs,
which currently cannot be assessed using regular
expressions or tools like SymPy at the code level
and necessitate manual review. However, this data
holds significant research value. Secondly, the automated scoring system we propose cannot perform specific analysis based on the particulars of
each question. It makes logical judgments solely
based on the two symbols or numerical expressions inputted, without integrating any special constraints that may exist within the actual problem
context. What’s more, the development of datasets
for multimodal scientific reasoning requires extensive manual effort in gathering and annotating data,

which constrains the diversity and difficulty of multimodal scientific challenges. As a result, this hampers AI’s capacity to learn from and address more
intricate scenarios.

References
01-ai. 2023. Yi-34b-chat model card.
01-ai. 2024. Yi-vl-34b model card.
Aida Amini, Saadia Gabriel, Shanchuan Lin, Rik
Koncel-Kedziorski, Yejin Choi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2019. MathQA: Towards interpretable math
word problem solving with operation-based formalisms. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages
2357–2367, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Daman Arora, Himanshu Gaurav Singh, and Mausam.
2023. Have llms advanced enough? a challenging
problem solving benchmark for large language models.
Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang,
Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou,
and Jingren Zhou. 2023. Qwen-vl: A frontier large
vision-language model with versatile abilities. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12966.
Daniel Bobrow et al. 1964. Natural language input for
a computer problem solving system.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg,
Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro,
and Yi Zhang. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
Jie Cao and Jing Xiao. 2022. An augmented benchmark
dataset for geometric question answering through
dual parallel text encoding. In Proceedings of the
29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 1511–1520, Gyeongju, Republic of
Korea. International Committee on Computational
Linguistics.
Jiaqi Chen, Tong Li, Jinghui Qin, Pan Lu, Liang Lin,
Chongyu Chen, and Xiaodan Liang. 2022. UniGeo:
Unifying geometry logical reasoning via reformulating mathematical expression. In Proceedings of
the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 3313–3323, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jiaqi Chen, Jianheng Tang, Jinghui Qin, Xiaodan Liang,
Lingbo Liu, Eric Xing, and Liang Lin. 2021. GeoQA:
A geometric question answering benchmark towards
multimodal numerical reasoning. In Findings of

the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACLIJCNLP 2021, pages 513–523, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Wenhu Chen, Ming Yin, Max Ku, Pan Lu, Yixin Wan,
Xueguang Ma, Jianyu Xu, Xinyi Wang, and Tony
Xia. 2023. TheoremQA: A theorem-driven question
answering dataset. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 7889–7901, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.
Katherine M Collins, Albert Q Jiang, Simon Frieder,
Lionel Wong, Miri Zilka, Umang Bhatt, Thomas
Lukasiewicz, Yuhuai Wu, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
William Hart, et al. 2023. Evaluating language
models for mathematics through interactions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.01694.
Simon Frieder, Luca Pinchetti, Alexis Chevalier,
Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas
Lukasiewicz, Philipp Christian Petersen, and Julius
Berner. 2023. Mathematical capabilities of chatgpt.
Zheqi He, Xinya Wu, Pengfei Zhou, Richeng Xuan,
Guang Liu, Xi Yang, Qiannan Zhu, and Hua Huang.
2024. Cmmu: A benchmark for chinese multi-modal
multi-type question understanding and reasoning.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou,
Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt.
2020. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300.
Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul
Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.03874.
Jinchang Hou, Chang Ao, Haihong Wu, Xiangtao Kong,
Zhigang Zheng, Daijia Tang, Chengming Li, Xiping
Hu, Ruifeng Xu, Shiwen Ni, and Min Yang. 2024.
E-eval: A comprehensive chinese k-12 education
evaluation benchmark for large language models.
Yuzhen Huang, Yuzhuo Bai, Zhihao Zhu, Junlei
Zhang, Jinghan Zhang, Tangjun Su, Junteng Liu,
Chuancheng Lv, Yikai Zhang, Jiayi Lei, Yao Fu,
Maosong Sun, and Junxian He. 2023. C-eval: A
multi-level multi-discipline chinese evaluation suite
for foundation models.
Albert Q. Jiang, Sean Welleck, Jin Peng Zhou, Wenda
Li, Jiacheng Liu, Mateja Jamnik, Timothée Lacroix,
Yuhuai Wu, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Draft,
sketch, and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers
with informal proofs.

Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B.
Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray,
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Scaling laws for neural language models.
Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Subhro Roy, Aida Amini, Nate
Kushman, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2016. MAWPS:
A math word problem repository. In Proceedings of
the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 1152–1157, San
Diego, California. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Aitor Lewkowycz, Anders Andreassen, David Dohan,
Ethan Dyer, Henryk Michalewski, Vinay Ramasesh,
Ambrose Slone, Cem Anil, Imanol Schlag, Theo
Gutman-Solo, Yuhuai Wu, Behnam Neyshabur, Guy
Gur-Ari, and Vedant Misra. 2022. Solving quantitative reasoning problems with language models.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. 2017. Program induction by rationale generation: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word
problems. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 158–167, Vancouver,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, Bo Li, Yuanhan
Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee. 2024. Llavanext: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge.
Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae
Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.08485.
Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chunyuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, KaiWei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024.
Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of
foundation models in visual contexts. In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).
Pan Lu, Ran Gong, Shibiao Jiang, Liang Qiu, Siyuan
Huang, Xiaodan Liang, and Song-Chun Zhu. 2021.
Inter-GPS: Interpretable geometry problem solving
with formal language and symbolic reasoning. In
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6774–
6786, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, KaiWei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter
Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2022. Learn to explain:
Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for science
question answering. In The 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Pan Lu, Liang Qiu, Wenhao Yu, Sean Welleck, and
Kai-Wei Chang. 2023. A survey of deep learning for
mathematical reasoning.

Ha-Thanh Nguyen. 2023. A brief report on lawgpt
1.0: A virtual legal assistant based on gpt-3. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.05729.
NousResearch. 2023. Nous-hermes-2-yi-34b model
card.
OpenAI. 2023a. Gpt-4 technical report.
OpenAI. 2023b. Gpt-4v(ision) system card.
Jielin Qiu, William Han, Jiacheng Zhu, Mengdi Xu,
Michael Rosenberg, Emerson Liu, Douglas Weber,
and Ding Zhao. 2023. Transfer knowledge from
natural language to electrocardiography: Can we detect cardiovascular disease through language models?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.09017.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu,
and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the
limits of mathematical reasoning in open language
models.
Liangtai Sun, Yang Han, Zihan Zhao, Da Ma, Zhennan
Shen, Baocai Chen, Lu Chen, and Kai Yu. 2023. Scieval: A multi-level large language model evaluation
benchmark for scientific research.
Gemini Team. 2023. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models.
Trieu H Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V Le, He He,
and Thang Luong. 2024. Solving olympiad geometry without human demonstrations. Nature,
625(7995):476–482.
Xiaoxuan Wang, Ziniu Hu, Pan Lu, Yanqiao Zhu, Jieyu
Zhang, Satyen Subramaniam, Arjun R. Loomba,
Shichang Zhang, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang.
2024. Scibench: Evaluating college-level scientific
problem-solving abilities of large language models.
Yan Wang, Xiaojiang Liu, and Shuming Shi. 2017.
Deep neural solver for math word problems. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 845–854,
Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel,
Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama,
Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H.
Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy
Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emergent abilities of large language models.
Tianwen Wei, Jian Luan, Wei Liu, Shuang Dong, and
Bin Wang. 2023. Cmath: Can your language model
pass chinese elementary school math test?
Johannes Welbl, Nelson F. Liu, and Matt Gardner. 2017.
Crowdsourcing multiple choice science questions.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Noisy Usergenerated Text, pages 94–106, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Computational Linguistics.

Sean Welleck, Jiacheng Liu, Ronan Le Bras, Hannaneh
Hajishirzi, Yejin Choi, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2021.
Naturalproofs: Mathematical theorem proving in natural language.
Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng,
Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu
Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, Cong Wei, Botao
Yu, Ruibin Yuan, Renliang Sun, Ming Yin, Boyuan
Zheng, Zhenzhu Yang, Yibo Liu, Wenhao Huang,
Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen. 2023. Mmmu:
A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi.
Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Dianjie Lu,
Bingchao Wu, Bei Guan, Wang Yongji, and JianGuang Lou. 2023. Large language models meet
NL2Code: A survey. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7443–
7464, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cedegao E Zhang, Katherine M Collins, Adrian Weller,
and Joshua B Tenenbaum. 2023. Ai for mathematics: A cognitive science perspective. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.13021.
Duzhen Zhang, Yahan Yu, Chenxing Li, Jiahua Dong,
Dan Su, Chenhui Chu, and Dong Yu. 2024a. Mmllms: Recent advances in multimodal large language
models.
Ge Zhang, Xinrun Du, Bei Chen, Yiming Liang, Tongxu
Luo, Tianyu Zheng, Kang Zhu, Yuyang Cheng,
Chunpu Xu, Shuyue Guo, Haoran Zhang, Xingwei
Qu, Junjie Wang, Ruibin Yuan, Yizhi Li, Zekun
Wang, Yudong Liu, Yu-Hsuan Tsai, Fengji Zhang,
Chenghua Lin, Wenhao Huang, Wenhu Chen, and
Jie Fu. 2024b. Cmmmu: A chinese massive multidiscipline multimodal understanding benchmark.
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang,
Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen
Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen
Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang,
Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu,
Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. A
survey of large language models.
Kunhao Zheng, Jesse Michael Han, and Stanislas Polu.
2022. Minif2f: a cross-system benchmark for formal
olympiad-level mathematics.
Aojun Zhou, Ke Wang, Zimu Lu, Weikang Shi, Sichun
Luo, Zipeng Qin, Shaoqing Lu, Anya Jia, Linqi Song,
Mingjie Zhan, and Hongsheng Li. 2023. Solving
challenging math word problems using gpt-4 code
interpreter with code-based self-verification.

A

Dataset Details

A.1

Data Sources

Our data sources can be split into the following
three parts:
1. Global Mathematics and Physics Olympiad
Problems. The Mathematics and Physics
Olympiad problems are globally recognized
for their complexity and quality. These problems often require multiple methods of solution and the ability to integrate sub-disciplines
from within the broader fields of mathematics
and physics. The participants in these competitions represent some of the most proficient
individuals worldwide in logical reasoning
within mathematics and physics. This not only
sets a high standard for problem-solving but
also fosters a diverse set of analytical skills
that are crucial for the advancement of large
models.
2. Regional and National Chinese Mathematics Competitions. In addition to maintaining
a high level of difficulty, regional competitions and the CMO introduce elements specific to the Chinese context. This inclusion
is instrumental in furthering the development
and research of Chinese-oriented and multilingual large models. By encompassing a wide
array of mathematics and physics problems,
these competitions provide a unique opportunity to develop models that are adaptable
and proficient across different mathematical
queries, enhancing their versatility and effectiveness.
3. Gaokao Mock Questions for Mathematics
and Physics. Given that the resolution of
Olympiad-level problems typically necessitates models with substantial parameter sizes,
we also incorporate Gaokao simulation problems to evaluate smaller models’ capabilities in answering free-form mathematics and
physics questions.
The integration of data from Gaokao simulation
problems, regional and national competitions, to
the global Olympiads constructs a smooth difficulty
transition curve. This methodology not only distinguishes the mathematical and physical problemsolving capabilities of different models but also
provides guidance on the scaling laws for models
specialized in these domains.

Subject

Maths

Physics

Source
IMO
RMM
ARML
EMC
EGMO
IPhO
APhO
EPhO
USAPhO
PUPC
OPhO

Coverage Years
2006-2022
2011, 2013, 2015-2019, 2021, 2023
2009-2014, 2019, 2023
1998-2023
2013, 2015-2023
1984, 1986-1990, 2008-2012, 2014-2016, 2018-2019, 2021
2013-2015
2019-2022
2017-2021
2020-2022
2020-2023

Number
509
53
505
364
64
381
200
17
113
65
132

Table 5: Summary of Problems in Math and Physics Competitions, with full acronyms listed in the Table 6

A.2

Data Curation Process

Our initial step involves a comprehensive survey of
well-known Olympiad competitions, and the list of
which is accessible through the AoPS community
platform 7 . We cataloged these competitions based
on several criteria: difficulty level, volume of questions, availability of materials in public domains,
language, discipline, and coverage years. Following the design principles outlined in Section 3.1,
we meticulously select specific contests and years
that not only adhere to our dataset design criteria
but also try to span the widest possible range of
years (Table 5).
In the format conversion phase, we also manually annotated the subfield of each question in
maths or physics, with their distribution detailed in
Table 9.
A.3

Example of Progressive Problem in
Physics

Figures 10 and 11 present a sequential challenge
from the International Physics Olympiad (IPhO)
2021, illustrating the intricacies of progressive
problem-solving in a competitive context. This
particular problem set exemplifies a common trait
in advanced physics competitions: the dependency
of many questions on the solutions and materials of
preceding ones. These dependencies are sometimes
explicit, but most are implicit, weaving a complex
web of interconnected knowledge and reasoning.
An explicit instance of this dependency can be
observed in problem C.2, where the prompt directly
requires the use of the symbol β defined in B.1 for
the calculation of an unknown quantity. This re7

https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c13

quirement not only tests the participants’ ability to
understand and apply physical concepts but also assesses their skill in navigating through and linking
various parts of a problem set. Such explicit instructions are crucial for guiding participants through
the logical progression of the problems, yet the majority of dependencies remain implicit, demanding
a deeper level of comprehension and integration of
the material.
This structure of problem-solving reflects a realistic scientific inquiry, where discoveries and solutions often rely on previously established knowledge. The explicit mention of β in C.2 as derived from B.1 is emblematic of this educational
approach, aiming to foster a holistic understanding and the ability to build upon existing information to solve complex problems. It underscores the
importance of thorough comprehension of earlier
sections for successful problem-solving in later sections, simulating real-world scientific challenges
where new solutions are often predicated on a foundation of established knowledge.

B

Evaluation Details

B.1

Details of the Evaluated Models

B.1.1

LMMs

We have selected current mainstream LMMs that
have performed the best on past scientific multimodal datasets for evaluation.
The closed-source models include: GPT4V (OpenAI, 2023b), developed by OpenAI, which
is currently the most powerful multimodal model.
Gemini (Team, 2023) is the LMM series developed by Google Deepmind, with Gemini-UltraVision being purported to have surpassed GPT-4V

Subject

Maths

Physics

Acronym
IMO
RMM
ARML
EMC
EGMO
IPhO
APhO
EPhO
USAPhO
PUPC
OPhO

Full name
International Mathematical Olympiad
Romanian Master of Mathematics
American Regions Mathematics League
Euclid Mathematics Competition
European Girls’ Mathematical Olympiad
International Physics Olympiad
Asian Physics Olympiad
European Physics Olympiad
USA Physics Olympiad
Princeton University Physics Competition
Online Physics Olympiad

Table 6: Full names of all competitions’acronyms used in this paper

on datasets like MMMU. However the unavailability of Google’s API for Gemini Ultra, we test
the accessible Gemini-Pro-Vision as an alternative.
Qwen-VL-Max (Bai et al., 2023), developed by Alibaba, is the largest LMM, and stands on par with
GPT-4V and Gemini-Ultra in multi-modal tasks.
Due to the large proportion of Chinese data used in
its training, Qwen-VL-Max has a certain advantage
in Chinese language ability.

The open-source models include: Yi-VL34B (01-ai, 2024) is the first open-source 34B
multi-modal model that has demonstrated satisfying performance on several latest datasets. With
Chinese text-image pairs included in the training process, Yi-VL-34B offers adequate multilingual support. LLaVA-NeXT-34B (Liu et al.,
2024) claims to be the strongest open-source LMM,
with enhancements in reasoning, OCR, and world
knowledge. Despite being trained exclusively with
English multi-modal data, it demonstrates an emergent zero-shot Chinese multi-modal capability on
Chinese benchmarks.

It should be noted that an image must be passed
for Gemini-Pro-Vision, LLaVA-NeXT, and Yi-VL
during inference. Therefore, for the text-only questions in OlympiadBench dataset, we use the corresponding text-model api (for closed-source models), or their base LLM (for open-source models).
To examine the impact of replacing LMM with
base LLM for processing text-only data, we subsequently compare the performance differences between GPT-4V and GPT-4 on text-only questions
in OlympiadBench.

B.1.2 LLMs
The field of LLM starts early in scientific areas such
as mathematics and physics, with models specifically trained occurring. We select DeepSeekMath7B-RL (Shao et al., 2024) as the primary baseline for text-only questions. DeepSeekMath-7BRL is pre-trained on 120B math-related data and
enhanced chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning capabilities using reinforcement learning, in the result
scoring close to GPT-4 and Gemini-Ultra on the
MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) dataset. We report
the results of the selected LMMs (or their LLM
counterparts) on the text-only questions for comparison, and additionally evaluate GPT-4 in order
to compare with GPT-4V 8 .
B.2

Detailed Experiment Result

The comparison of the performance of mainstream
closed-ended models on different datasets are
shown in Table 7.
Benchmark
MATH
MathVista(testmini)
OlympiadBench

GPT-4(V)
52.9
49.9
17.97

Qwen
VL-Max
50.0
10.09

Gemini
Pro
32.6
45.2
4.22

Table 7: Comparison of Performance on Different
Benchmarks. The values for MATH and MathVista
are obtained from Gemini and Qwen’s report.

To further discuss the performance difference
between GPT-4 and GPT-4V on the PhysicsEn_COMP, we split the En_COMP dataset into
two sub-datasets, with normal-PhO being normal
8

The version of GPT-4 is "0125-preview" and GPT-4V is
"1106-vision-preview".

PhO questions, and long-PhO being PhO questions
that show in a relational series, therefore having
long context. As shown in table 8, GPT-4 keeps
performing slightly better on normal-PhO, but
lags much behind on long-PhO, which may indicate improvement of long-context text reasoning
capabilities after multimodal training.

GPT-4V
GPT-4

long-PhO
(157)

normal-PhO
(74)

18.47
14.92

1.35
4.05

Table 8: Average accuracy of GPT-4V and GPT-4 for
the En_COMP dataset

ability of understanding and imaging plane or 3d
situations. GPT-4V also performs poorly on knowledge points that are more computationally intensive
such as conic curves; and struggles to give a complete and comprehensive classification discussion,
therefore prone to making mistakes on combinatorial problems. However, GPT-4V is stronger in
knowledge related to derivatives and complex numbers.
As for Physics problems, none of the knowledge
points surpass an accuracy of 16%, and GPT-4V
struggles more in thermodynamics and mechanics.
C.2

Detailed Description of the Error Types
in GPT-4V’s solving or proving process

The error types are as follows:
B.3 Unavailable Responses for Closed-Source
Models
As described in table 4, the response for some problems are not available, the main causes are as follows:
1. Exceeding input limit: Some of the context
of the problems are too long, which exceed
the input token limitation for the API. This
case mainly occurs in Physics-En_COMP that
contains long-context problems of over 6,000
tokens.
2. Inappropriate response: Some problems trigger inappropriate response, which are banned
by the API to return.
3. No response: Some problems continuously
get no or empty response from the API.
4. Request timed out: Some problems continuously fail to get a response.
We removed the problems with unavailable response when calculating the accuracy.

C

Additional Analysis and Examples

C.1

Performance analysis of GPT-4V

We analyzed GPT-4V’s performance (accuracy
on open-ended problems) on different knowledge points based on the knowledge point labels
in OlympiadBench, the results can be found at Figure 5.
For Math problems, GPT-4V has poor performance in geometry, with the lowest scoring knowledge points being almost exclusively geometryrelated. This may show the need of improving the

1. Question Misunderstanding: GPT-4V sometimes misunderstands the intention or settings
of the question.
2. Value Calculation Error: GPT-4V make simple calculation mistakes sometimes, such as
outputting 2b + 7 = b+7
2 , these mistakes appears more in Chinese and Math contents.
3. Expression Calculation Error: Similar to value
calculation error, but happens when transforming between two expressions.
4. Logical Reasoning / Induction Error / Conceptual Confusion: GPT-4V sometimes makes
false reasoning or induction, as well as encounters conceptual confusion (see Figure 7
for example).
5. Introducing Unnecessary variables or concepts: GPT-4V sometimes suddenly introduce
variables or try to use concepts that have no
contribution to solving the problem, which not
only makes the output longer, but also may
confuse GPT-4V itself and leads to incorrect
output.
6. Conclusion Hallucination: GPT-4V sometimes hallucinates for a conclusion that is not
reached in former output, or hallucinates a
theorem that does not really exist (for example, when solving geometric proving problem,
GPT-4V always mention "The Power Theorem", which does not exist, and all the proof
thereafter will lost their logic).
7. Unfinished Answering: GPT-4V sometimes
says the question have confliction in settings

Solid Geometry
Plane Geometry
Geometry
Polar Coordinates and
Parametric Equations
Trigonometric Functions
Inequalities
Number Theory

Thermodynamics

Probability and Statistics

Mechanics

Combinations
Electromagnetism

Set Theory
Elementary Functions

Wave Physics

Algebra

Modern Physics

Logic

Unclassified

Conic Sections

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Sequence
Derivatives
Complex Numbers
Unclassified
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Figure 5: An analysis of GPT-4V’s accuracy on different knowledge points, blue for Math and red for Physics.

√
4V calculates the answer as 2 × 3970 ≈
1.414 × 3970 ≈ 5615.88, which falls out
of the acceptable range, but is actually correct. Another problem is the current automated scoring system can’t judge
√
√ the equality
between expressions such as a b and a2 b
with a ≥ 0. These flaws call for future work
such as automatically deciding required precision of the answer, and automatically judging
equality between expressions.

(which is not true), or degenerates after some
tokens.
8. Insufficient Classification Discussions: When
doing classification discussion, GPT-4V may
miss some possible situation, or have overlapped discussion (see Figure 6 for example).
9. Incorrect Judging: Sometimes GPT-4V gives
the right answer, but is judged as incorrect
due to the limitation of the automated scoring system: One important problem is that
many problems, especially Physics problems,
accept answers that fall in a specific range
due to rounding up, rather than a fixed numerical answer, so a precision is needed for
automatically calculating the range, which
was not given in many cases. Using relative
precision (such as a percentage of 1%), may
leads to accepting answers with unacceptable
error when the origin answer is big, so we
manually decide the precision for OlympiadBench problems if there is no official precision given, which may leads to incorrect
judging. For example, in a Physics question (Physics-En_COMP#995), the precision
is manually √
set as 1e1, with the official answer being 2 × 3970 ≈ 5614.43. GPT-

C.3

Other Observation for Open-Ended
Problems

1. Given a simple solution, GPT-4V may choose
a more complex method to solve the problem
(see Figure 8).
2. Models may give correct answers with a false
process. Mainly observed for problems with
a simple answer, such as the variables takes 0
as the answer.
3. GPT-4V may success in giving correct overall
idea, but fail in calculation (such as solving
quadratic equations with extra negative signs),
which leads to a wrong answer.

Question

GPT-4V’s Solution

A die, with the numbers
1,2,3,4,6, and 8 on its six
faces, is rolled. After this
roll, if an odd number
appears on the top face,
all odd numbers on the
die are doubled. If an
even number appears on
the top face, all the even
numbers are halved. If
the given die changes in
this way, what is the
probability that a 2 will
appear on the second roll
of the die?

Let's first determine the possible outcomes after the first roll and the corresponding changes
to the die.
If an odd number appears on the top face after the first roll (which can be either 1, 3, or 6),
all odd numbers are doubled. So the new faces of the die will be:
- If 1 appears, it becomes 2. (3 should also be doubled.)
- If 3 appears, it becomes 6. (1 should also be doubled.)
- The number 6 is even, so it remains unchanged. (Incorrectly classifying 6 into odd
numbers, which leads to failure in thorough discussion of even numbers below.)
If an even number appears on the top face after the first roll (which can be either 2, 4, or 8),
all even numbers are halved. So the new faces of the die will be:
- If 2 appears, it becomes 1. (Same problem.)
- If 4 appears, it becomes 2.
- If 8 appears, it becomes 4.
Now, let‘s calculate the probability of getting a 2 on the second roll based on the first roll:
!
- If the first roll is 1, the die will have faces 2, 2, 6, 4, 6, 8. The probability of rolling a 2 is ".
……
!
- If the first roll is 8, the die will have faces 1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 4. The probability of rolling a 2 is .
"
Now, we need to calculate the total probability of rolling a 2 on the second roll. Since each
face has an equal probability of appearing on the first roll, we can average the probabilities:
#
!
!
#
Total probability × + ⋯ + = ⋯ = .

Answer
!

(Full solution omitted,
%
see MathEn_COMP#2355 if
needed.)

"

"

#

"

$

So the final answer is \boxed{$}.

Figure 6: An example of GPT-4V making insufficient classification discussions in a combinatorial problem. The red
text is the wrong part of GPT-4V’s answer, and the purple text is our further illustration.

4. GPT-4V may not fully utilize the information
from the image (see Figure 9).

D

Automatic Scoring Pipeline

The pipeline workflow is shown in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1: Auto Scoring Judge
Input: GroundTruth, ModelOutput;
Output: Boolean value indicating match;
Preprocess GroundTruth and ModelOutput;
if GroundTruth equals ModelOutput then
return True;
else
if GroundTruth and ModelOutput are intervals or tuples then
if GroundTruth equals ModelOutput as intervals or tuples then
return True;
else
return False;
end
else
if GroundTruth equals ModelOutput numerically then
return True;
else
if Both GroundTruth and ModelOutput contain "=" then
return EquationEqual(GroundTruth, ModelOutput);
else
return ExpressionEqual(GroundTruth, ModelOutput);
end
end
end
end

Figure 7: An example of GPT-4V getting confused between the concept of "vertical to the plane" and "vertical(to
the ground)".

Question

GPT-4V’s Solution

已知正数 !, # 满⾜: ! + # = 1.
!
#
求 " + $的最小值.
Standard Solution
由-+.−

)

2 -. = - − . ≥ 0, 故 - +
!
#
. ≥ 2 -.. 所求 " + $ =
!
#
+$
"

$

!+# =1+4+"+

#"
$ #"
≥ 5 + 2 " · $ = 9, 等号在
$
!
)
! = / , # = /处取到, 故最小值为

9.

!

#

由已知条件 ! + # = 1，我们可以将 " + $表达为 ! 和 #

的函数。首先，我们将 # 用 ! 表示出来，即 # = 1 − !。然后将 #
!
#
!
#
!
#
代⼊ " + $中，得到：" + $ = " + !%"

为了找到这个表达式的最小值，我们可以使用微分法。首先，我们对
& !
#
!
#
上述表达式求导：&" " + !%" = " ! + (!%")! .

为了找到极值点，我们令导数等于零：…. 解这个⽅程，…我们得到：
3! ) + 2! − 1 = 0. 这是⼀个⼆次⽅程，我们可以使用求根公式来解它：
%*± * !%#,, 其中- = 3, . = 2, / = −1，代⼊求根公式得到：! =
),
%)±#
!
⋯ = . . 我们得到两个解，分别是：! = / 或! = −1.
!
由于 ! 是正数，我们排除 ! = −1 的解，所以 ! = / . 将 ! 的值代⼊

!=

# = 1 − !，得到…。
!
#
!
#
!
#
现在我们可以计算 " + $的值：" + $ = " + ! = ⋯ = 9.
所以最终答案是 9。

#

#

Figure 8: An example of GPT-4V giving a solution that is much complex than that of the standard solution, although
reaching the correct answer eventually.

Figure 9: An example of GPT-4V’s failure in utilizing image information from Math-Zh_COMP. GPT-4V starts
proving with "we have ∠DEF = ∠F BC = 59◦ ", which is an error that can evidently be identified from the image,
showing insufficient comprehension of the given plane geometry figure.

Subset

Subfield

Derivative
Conic Sections
Sequence
Trigonometric Functions
Set Theory
Logic
CEE Math
Elementary Functions
Inequality
PC&PE
Probability and Statistics
Plane Geometry
Solid Geometry
Complex Numbers
Combinatorics
Algebra
COMP Math
Number Theory
Geometry
Mechanics
Electromagnetism
CEE&COMP Physics
Thermodynamics
Optics
Modern Physics

Number
334
350
258
236
22
3
158
138
80
758
790
1322
8
369
525
256
535
1010
714
248
153
209

Table 9: Statistics of subfield in Mathematics and Physics. PC&PE stands for Polar Coordinates and Parametric
Equations.

Q2-1

Theory

English (Official)

Electrostatic lens (10 points)
Consider a uniformly charged metallic ring of radius 𝑅 and total charge 𝑞. The ring is a hollow toroid of
thickness 2𝑎 ≪ 𝑅. This thickness can be neglected in parts A, B, C, and E. The 𝑥𝑦 plane coincides with the
plane of the ring, while the 𝑧-axis is perpendicular to it, as shown in Figure 1. In parts A and B you might
need to use the formula (Taylor expansion)
1
(1 + 𝑥)𝜀 ≈ 1 + 𝜀𝑥 + 𝜀(𝜀 − 1)𝑥2 , when |𝑥| ≪ 1.
2

Figure 1. A charged ring of radius R.

Part A. Electrostatic potential on the axis of the ring (1 point)
A.1

Calculate the electrostatic potential Φ(𝑧) along the axis of the ring at a 𝑧 distance
from its center (point A in Figure 1).

0.3pt

A.2

Calculate the electrostatic potential Φ(𝑧) to the lowest non-zero power of 𝑧, assuming 𝑧 ≪ 𝑅.

0.4pt

A.3

An electron (mass 𝑚 and charge −𝑒) is placed at point A (Figure 1, 𝑧 ≪ 𝑅). What
is the force acting on the electron? Looking at the expression of the force, determine the sign of 𝑞 so that the resulting motion would correspond to oscillations.
The moving electron does not influence the charge distribution on the ring.

0.2pt

A.4

What is the angular frequency 𝜔 of such harmonic oscillations?

0.1pt

Part B. Electrostatic potential in the plane of the ring (1.7 points)
In this part of the problem you will have to analyze the potential Φ(𝑟) in the plane of the ring (𝑧 = 0)
for 𝑟 ≪ 𝑅 (point B in Figure 1). To the lowest non-zero power of 𝑟 the electrostatic potential is given by
Φ(𝑟) ≈ 𝑞(𝛼 + 𝛽𝑟2 ).
B.1

Find the expression for 𝛽. You might need to use the Taylor expansion formula
given above.

Figure 10: An example illustrating the first section of Problem 2 in IPhO 2021.

1.5pt

Q2-2

Theory

English (Official)

B.2

An electron is placed at point B (Figure 1, 𝑟 ≪ 𝑅). What is the force acting on the
electron? Looking at the expression of the force, determine the sign of 𝑞 so that
the resulting motion would correspond to harmonic oscillations. The moving
electron does not influence the charge distribution on the ring.

0.2pt

Part C. The focal length of the idealized electrostatic lens: instantaneous charging (2.3
points)
One wants to build a device to focus electrons—an electrostatic lens. Let us consider the following construction. The ring is situated perpendicularly to the 𝑧-axis, as shown in Figure 2. We have a source that
produces on-demand packets of non-relativistic electrons. Kinetic energy of these electrons is 𝐸 = 𝑚𝑣2 /2
(𝑣 is velocity) and they leave the source at precisely controlled moments. The system is programmed so
that the ring is charge-neutral most of the time, but its charge becomes 𝑞 when electrons are closer than
a distance 𝑑/2 (𝑑 ≪ 𝑅) from the plane of the ring (shaded region in Figure 2, called “active region”). In
part C assume that charging and de-charging processes are instantaneous and the electric field "fills the
space" instantaneously as well. One can neglect magnetic fields and assume that the velocity of electrons
in the 𝑧-direction is constant. Moving electrons do not perturb the charge distribution on the ring.

Figure 2. A model of an electrostatic lens.
C.1

Determine the focal length 𝑓 of this lens. Assume that 𝑓 ≫ 𝑑. Express your answer in terms of the constant 𝛽 from question B.1 and other known quantities.
Assume that before reaching the "active region" the electron packet is parallel
to the 𝑧-axis and 𝑟 ≪ 𝑅. The sign of 𝑞 is such so that the lens is focusing.

1.3pt

In reality the electron source is placed on the 𝑧-axis at a distance 𝑏 > 𝑓 from the center of the ring.
Consider that electrons are no longer parallel to the 𝑧-axis before reaching the "active region", but are
emitted from a point source at a range of different angles 𝛾 ≪ 1 rad to the 𝑧-axis. Electrons are focused
in a point situated at a distance 𝑐 from the center of the ring.
C.2

Find 𝑐. Express your answer in terms of the constant 𝛽 from question B.1 and
other known quantities.

Figure 11: An example illustrating the second section of Problem 2 in IPhO 2021.

0.8pt

