                                            Benchmarking the Pedagogical Knowledge of Large
                                                           Language Models


                                            Maxime Lelièvre1,2         Amy Waldock1,2          Meng Liu1,2        Natalia Valdes Aspillaga1,2

                                               Alasdair Mackintosh1,2              María José Ogando Portela1,2                Jared Lee1,2
arXiv:2506.18710v3 [cs.CL] 1 Jul 2025




                                                 Paul Atherton1,2               Robin A. A. Ince1,2              Oliver G. B. Garrod1,2

                                                                                         1 Fab Inc
                                                                                  2 AI-for-Education.org




                                                                                        Abstract
                                                  Benchmarks like Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) have played
                                                  a pivotal role in evaluating AI’s knowledge and abilities across diverse domains.
                                                  However, existing benchmarks predominantly focus on content knowledge, leaving
                                                  a critical gap in assessing models’ understanding of pedagogy — the method
                                                  and practice of teaching. This paper introduces The Pedagogy Benchmark, a
                                                  novel dataset designed to evaluate large language models on their Cross-Domain
                                                  Pedagogical Knowledge (CDPK) and Special Education Needs and Disability
                                                  (SEND) pedagogical knowledge. These benchmarks are built on a carefully curated
                                                  set of questions sourced from the Chilean Ministry of Education’s professional
                                                  development exams for teachers, which cover a range of pedagogical subdomains
                                                  such as teaching strategies and assessment methods. Here we outline the method-
                                                  ology and development of these benchmarks. We report results for 97 models,
                                                  with accuracies spanning a range from 28% to 89% on the pedagogical knowledge
                                                  questions. We consider the relationship between cost and accuracy and chart the
                                                  progression of the Pareto value frontier over time. We provide online leaderboards
                                                  at https://rebrand.ly/pedagogy, which are updated with new models and allow
                                                  interactive exploration and filtering based on various model properties, such as
                                                  cost per token and open-vs-closed weights, as well as looking at performance in
                                                  different subjects.
                                                  LLMs and generative AI have tremendous potential to influence education and
                                                  help to address the global learning crisis. Education-focused benchmarks are
                                                  crucial to measure models’ capacities to understand pedagogical concepts, respond
                                                  appropriately to learners’ needs, and support effective teaching practices across
                                                  diverse contexts. They are needed for informing the responsible and evidence-based
                                                  deployment of LLMs and LLM-based tools in educational settings, and for guiding
                                                  both development and policy decisions.


                                        1    Introduction
                                        There is a global learning crisis, with 90% of children in low-income countries unable to read a simple
                                        sentence by aged 101. The recent advances of large language models (LLMs) have brought new
                                        possibilities to education, with LLM-based educational tools being developed at a rapid pace [25],
                                            1https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/blog/back-basics-lessons-confronting-learning-crisis
such as Khanmigo by Khan Academy and MagicSchool.ai. Although high-income countries have led
the early adoption of these tools, there is also growing exploration of their application in low- and
middle-income country contexts. At AI-for-Education we have mapped2 over 280 AI-based EdTech
products covering a range of application areas, such as adaptive personalized learning, student-facing
chatbots, teacher assistants and learning management systems. These applications highlight the
potential of LLMs to address educational challenges, including equitable access to quality learning,
personalization of instructional approaches and reduction of teachers’ workload. However, in this
fast-moving landscape it is difficult to evaluate models from an education lens, as there are relatively
few public benchmarks or evaluations which directly focus on educational applications.
As generative models, LLMs can produce rich and varied outputs, which means that evaluating such
models can be difficult. Much effort has been devoted to quantitatively assessing the performance of
LLMs with benchmarks: systematic quantitative evaluations of models’ knowledge or abilities. These
benchmarks typically consist of a dataset of questions or problems, together with some validated
ground-truth or scoring function, so they can be applied to different models to obtain a numerical
score for each. This score is intended to encapsulate some relevant aspect of model performance, and
to facilitate direct comparison between models on that aspect. Many benchmarks have focused on
evaluating the knowledge that LLMs have been able to encapsulate from their training corpus. For
example, MMLU [10] sources multiple-choice questions from a wide range of human-focused exams.
As models have increased in size and their knowledge base expands, performance on some existing
benchmarks has saturated, leading to the development of more difficult tests, such as GPQA [20],
and more recently Humanity’s Last Exam [19]. Both of these present extremely difficult technical
questions that very few human experts could answer. Such benchmarks have been widely employed to
compare models, and model developers typically publish scores from popular benchmarks when they
release new models. Multiple leaderboards and comparison sites provide systematic comparisons of
available models3.
From an education perspective, it is important to distinguish between content knowledge (the factual
or conceptual understanding of a subject) and pedagogical knowledge (understanding the methods
and strategies used to effectively teach a subject). After reviewing the LLM benchmark literature we
did not find any existing LLM benchmarks which explicitly focus on knowledge of pedagogy, such as
understanding of learning theories, instructional design and teaching practices. With the rapid rise in
educational applications, we sought to address this gap by developing a novel Pedagogy Benchmark.
This is a set of 920 multiple choice questions (MCQs) from teacher training exams, which evaluate
LLM’s cross-domain pedagogical knowledge (CDPK). We also provide a benchmark focusing on
Special Educational Needs and Disability (SEND), which consists of a further 223 questions focussed
on this area.
By bridging this gap, our benchmarks aim to accelerate and improve the responsible development
of LLMs for educational applications, paving the way for more impactful and evidence-based
applications of AI in education. Here we describe the development of these benchmarks together
with a comprehensive set of results for 97 current and historical LLMs covering a range of providers
and model sizes. We have made the data4 and code for running the benchmarks openly available5 and
maintain regularly updated leaderboards showcasing the results6.


2   Related Work

Zhao et al. [28] provide a taxonomy of LLM abilities, considering at the highest level: language
generation, knowledge utilisation, complex reasoning, and other advanced abilities. Language
generation can include open-ended tasks like text summarization or code generation, while advanced
abilities can include areas like human-alignment and tool use. Different abilities in this taxonomy
present different challenges for the development of quantitative benchmark assessments.


   2https://ai-for-education.org/ai-products/
   3For example, https://livebench.ai, https://huggingface.co/open-llm-leaderboard, https://www.vellum.ai/
llm-leaderboard to list just a few.
   4https://huggingface.co/AI-for-Education/pedagogy-benchmark
   5https://github.com/AI-for-Education/pedagogy-benchmark
   6https://rebrand.ly/pedagogy


                                                    2
For example, language generation tasks are fundamentally open-ended and subjective, often without
clear correct or incorrect answers. While some code outputs can be run and objectively tested for
correct functionality, other open-ended language tasks are more difficult to assess. Benchmarks in this
area can use various approaches to score outputs generated from a standardised dataset of prompts,
such as heuristic answer matching, human ratings (which can be difficult or costly to obtain at scale)
or an evaluation by other LLMs (often termed LLM-as-a-judge [30]). An example of a language
generation benchmark that uses human ratings at scale is Google’s recent Gemini evaluations [23]
(discussed below) which uses 395 human experts to generate and review thousands of human-LLM
chatbot interactions. An example of using LLM-as-a-judge at scale is HealthBench [1] from OpenAI,
which considers model responses to 5000 different multi-turn conversations related to healthcare. 262
human experts (qualified physicians) generated more than 48,000 example-specific binary evaluation
rubrics, which are then evaluated using LLM judges. Another example of the LLM-as-a-judge
approach being applied in the education domain is the work of Oak National Academy, which uses 24
different rubrics to assess and compare AI-generated lesson plans [7].
An alternative approach is to use a form of continuous user-blind A-B testing, in which real users
provide queries on any topic, are presented with answers from two or more unlabelled models and are
asked to choose their favourite. Using algorithms developed for ranking players in sports like chess, a
score is computed for each model based on its aggregate performance across a range of head-to-head
comparisons. An example of this is the Chatbot Arena [6], which provides a leaderboard based on
user preference in response to user-provided queries. This approach is interesting, but presents some
challenges including obtaining enough users with diverse queries, the ongoing costs of hosting and
inference, and possible systematic changes in users’ queries and preferences over time. One particular
criticism is that scoring in this system can be sensitive to relatively superficial stylistic properties of
the output, like the use of structured headings, bullet list, emojis etc. which have led to attempts to
control such rankings for length and style7.

2.1     Existing LLM Knowledge Benchmarks

We focus primarily on knowledge utilization, as our specific aim is to test models’ pedagogical
knowledge. For benchmarks in the area of knowledge utilization, the dataset of questions is core
to the evaluation process and can consist of either closed- or open-ended questions. Closed-ended
question formats, such as multiple-choice questions, make the output of the LLM easier to parse and
mark as they feature an answer that is easy to extract, match to the correct answer, and aggregate over
the full set of questions to give an accuracy score. For this reason, the MCQ approach has been the
most common approach used for LLM knowledge benchmarks.
The Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU) benchmark [10], has received much
attention as a tool to compare models’ knowledge. MMLU consists of 15,908 questions across 57
subjects, drawn from human exams across a range of topics, such as STEM fields, international law
and nutrition, and across different levels from primary and secondary school through to professional
examinations (e.g. Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology). However, as models have
improved over time performance on MMLU has started to saturate, and there is a risk that due to it’s
popularity the open-data questions would appear in training data or be used as a target for explicit
fine-tuning. To address this MMLU-Pro [27] has been developed as a more robust and difficult
alternative. This selects harder questions, with a larger number of response options and includes more
questions that require reasoning rather than just knowledge retrieval. In general, the rapid pace of
model development has meant this issue of saturation has been a common one, and it is an increasing
challenge to develop benchmarks that are hard enough to challenge current models.
The Google-Proof Q&A (GQPA) benchmark [20], was another attempt to address this problem. This
is a set of 448 specially written multiple-choice questions which were designed to be extremely
difficult, requiring in-depth expert (e.g. PhD-level) knowledge that is not easily available from web
searches. However, despite the difficulty of the questions, performance of new models has rapidly
increased in the few years since it was released. Currently, the best model scores more than 85%
accuracy on GPQA-Diamond, a subset of the most challenging and carefully verified questions.
Humanity’s Last Exam [19] attempts to develop questions with even higher levels of difficulty, and
addresses this through a crowd-sourcing procedure where experts are invited to submit their most
challenging questions. Humanity’s Last Exam consists of 2500 questions, and is by some margin
      7https://lmsys.org/blog/2024-08-28-style-control/


                                                          3
the hardest such multiple-choice benchmark, with current best accuracy around 21%. However,
the high-level of the difficulty of the questions goes beyond assessing content knowledge, as many
questions require scientific and logical reasoning to derive the answer.
Despite this tendency for models to saturate knowledge benchmarks relatively quickly after they are
developed, we nonetheless consider it important to develop a benchmark of pedagogical knowledge
to fill the gap we identified in the current landscape. Even if performance on our new benchmark
saturates for newer models, it is still useful to track performance for smaller, open-source, offline and
on-device models, particularly in the educational context of low- and middle-income countries.

2.2    Existing Education-focused LLM Benchmarks

In a recent note, AI-for-Education mapped existing benchmarks focusing on four specific educational
use-cases8: lesson plan generation, adaptive student exercises, student question answering, and
assessment generation. There were relatively few directly relevant benchmarks with publicly available
data that could be run automatically on new models (i.e. with code available and without requiring
human input or ratings). These included benchmarks related to pedagogical alignment of student
interactions [14], identifying specific misconceptions underlying student errors in maths problems
[17] and generating multiple-choice questions [3]. Khan Academy has released the Conversation-
Based Maths Tutoring Accuracy (CoMTA) Dataset, which consists of a data set of student-chatbot
interactions focused on maths problems, in which the challenge is for the model to determine whether
the student’s attempted answer in the final turn is accurate or not [16]. MinorBench [12] evaluates
LLMs on their ability to refuse unsafe or inappropriate queries from children.
There have also been a series of papers from Google’s LearnLM Team exploring approaches to
evaluating LLMs for educational applications in depth. Jurenka et al. [11] consider the problem of
assessing the pedagogical practice of an LLM tutor. Pedagogical practice refers to the actual behaviour
of the tutor, and whether that behaviour embodies sound pedagogical principles, for example, not
revealing the answer to a problem too early. However, this is challenging and requires manual ratings
of real multi-turn student-chatbot interactions by human experts. In [22], the LearnLM team focus
on pedagogical instruction following, with assessment again based on a large pool of pedagogy
experts analysing and rating real conversation traces. To give an idea of the scale of this undertaking,
they obtain 10,192 assessments of 2360 conversations consisting of over 58,000 messages from 228
experts. These interactions are rated against pedagogical principles such as managing cognitive
load, inspiring active learning, deepening metacognition, stimulating curiosity and adapting to the
learner. Most recently [23], they adopt an arena style head-to-head in which pedagogical experts
role playing specific student personas interact with a pair of models side-by-side, before selecting
their preference. These interactions are then further rated by a different set of experts. While this is
extremely promising and thorough approach, the cost and difficulty involved with obtaining expert
ratings of large-scale real human-LLM interactions, mean it is not possible to continually test a wide
range of models in this way.
In our literature review, we have not found any existing benchmarks that explicitly test pedagogical
knowledge in an easily replicable way that can be directly applied to new models.

3     Methods
3.1    Source of Questions

We extracted multiple-choice questions (MCQs) from the Chilean Ministry of Education’s ECEP
program. The ECEP (Evaluación de Conocimientos Específicos y Pedagógicos, Evaluation of Specific
and Pedagogical Knowledge), is an annual standardised test in Chile designed to assess teachers’
mastery of both content and pedagogical knowledge across various education levels and subjects.
Administered by the Agency for Education Quality9 (Agencia de Calidad de la Educación), and
developed by the Education Quality Agency and Center for Pedagogical Improvement, Experimentation,
and Research of the Chilean Ministry of Education10 (Agencia de la Calidad de Educación y Centro
     8https://rebrand.ly/9vl3pha
     9https://www.agenciaeducacion.cl/
    10https://www.cpeip.cl/cpeip/


                                                   4
de Perfeccionamiento, Experimentación e Investigaciones Pedagógicas) the assessment instrument
comprises 60 multiple-choice questions distributed across domains – including pedagogical knowledge
– and with varying levels of difficulty and complexity. The results of the ECEP, together with the
Teaching Portfolio, are used to determine teachers’ progression within the Teacher Professional
Development and Recognition System (Sistema de Reconocimiento del Desarrollo Profesional
Docente). This system supports, recognises and promotes career advancement by guiding teachers
towards an expected level of professional development and providing an incentive pathway to continue
their growth and effectiveness in the classroom11.
The Teacher Professional Development and Recognition System applies to teachers working in
municipal, government-subsidised private schools, and other publicly funded educational institutions.
The assessments are given substantial weight particularly for early career teachers, with failure to pass
after 2 attempts potentially resulting in dismissal or the loss of seniority within the system.12.
We sourced questions from ECEP exam papers administered between 2017–202313across all 7
educational levels: early childhood (Educación Parvularia, EP), early primary (Primer Ciclo
Generalista, PC), later primary (Educación Básicas Segundo Ciclo, SC), secondary (Educación
Media, EM), special education (Educación Especial EE; Educación Diferencial, ED), adult education
(Educación de Adultos, EA), and vocational/technical secondary education (Educación Media Técnico
Profesional, EMTP). Note that for the higher levels there are specific exams for different subject areas,
such as mathematics, history, biology, etc.
Our pipeline involved identifying, extracting, cleaning and translating questions from the PDF files for
each exam. Correct answers were provided in separate documents, which were parsed and matched to
the extracted questions. The initial extraction resulted in a pool of 9,978 MCQs obtained from 192
different exams (across different levels, subjects and years). This pool of MCQs was de-duplicated
and manually curated by a pedagogical expert to ensure quality, relevance and correctness. Each
question had the associated metadata in terms of level, from pre-primary to secondary, and subject
area obtained from the topic of the exam containing the question. These were manually checked by
the pedagogical expert and were amended as necessary (see Fig. 1). In addition, the pedagogical
expert labelled each question with a pedagogical subdomain (e.g. teaching strategies, student
understanding, assessment, education theories, classroom management). This resulted in 1143 MCQs
labelled with education level, subject and pedagogical domain. These questions are available at
https://huggingface.co/AI-for-Education/pedagogy-benchmark.
We considered the 223 questions from the category Special Education Needs and Disability (SEND)
separately from the others (Section 4.2). SEND questions were separated because they involve
specialist knowledge as well as teaching and assessment strategies not typically expected for mainstream
classroom teachers. While some SEND needs are addressed in regular schools, many of the scenarios
in these questions refer to cases managed by specialist staff or in special schools. This distinction
is also reflected in teacher training, where SEND is often treated as a separate course or stream.
Consequently, we considered it valuable to test these questions separately and report a distinct
SEND-specific knowledge score. Note that all questions used in the SEND benchmark came from
the exams covering special education ((Educación Especial EE; Educación Diferencial, ED). The
remaining 920 questions formed our primary cross-domain pedagogical knowledge benchmark.

3.2     Question Processing

Figure 2 shows a schematic of our question processing pipeline, which is detailed below.

3.2.1    Question Extraction and Pre-processing
Initial Extraction: The first step involved extracting the questions from the exam PDFs. Given that
the layout of the PDFs varied across different years and subjects, some care was necessary to manually
adjust the page range for extraction of each exam, and regular expressions were used to identify the
questions.
   11Article 19, Law No. 20.903 (2016), Establishing the Teaching Career System, Chile.
   12Congreso Nacional de Chile. (2023). Ley N° 21.625: Establece sistema único de evaluación docente. Diario
Oficial de la República de Chile, 24 de octubre de 2023. Accesed at: https://www.bcn.cl/leychile/navegar?
idNorma=1197193. See also https://cpeip.cl/sistema-reconocimiento/
   13https://www.cpeip.cl/ya-estan-disponibles-las-pruebas-ecep-2017-al-2020/


                                                     5
Figure 1: Distribution of the MCQs by Category (left), Education Level (center) and Education
Subdomain (right). Note that questions could be tagged with more than one education level.




                                                  Science (Pre-primary)
 At a preschool level, the educational team needs to evaluate in everyday contexts the following learning objective from
 the Natural Environment Exploration core: "Communicate some basic properties of the natural elements they explore,
 such as colors, textures, sizes, temperatures among others". Which performance of the children would demonstrate the
 achievement of the selected learning objective?

 A) During a learning experience, Santiago draws stones of different sizes
 B) During lunchtime, Pablo looks at the spoon and seeing his reflection says: "Look, Pablo!"
 C) During an experience in the yard, Maria collects different types of tree leaves in a basket
 D) During free play time in the yard, Soledad rubs some seeds in her hands and says: "Prickly"

 Correct answer: D
                                                 Social studies (Primary)
 According to the following objective: "Read simple plans of your environment, using reference points and categories of
 relative position," what activities are most appropriate to evaluate it in Year 2?

 A) Draw a plan of the classroom
 B) Interpret the symbols of a city plan
 C) Describe the location of places on a given map
 D) Determine the coordinates of given points on a grid

 Correct answer: C
                                                   General (Secondary)
 According to Bowlby’s theory, which of the following statements corresponds to a characteristic of attachment?

 A) It is a process that lasts until the early years of life
 B) It is a bond that must be stable and continuous to ensure proper development
 C) It is a bond that determines all affective relationships in life and development
 D) It is the first relationship of the newborn with its mother and cannot be replaced by another person

 Correct answer: B

Table 1: Example questions from the dataset with different subject categories and education level.




                                    Figure 2: Dataset Construction Pipeline



                                                             6
The PDF files for the exam years 2021, 2022, and 2023 did not contain embedded text which could be
extracted programmatically (as they were scanned documents rather than vector text). For these files,
an Optical Character Recognition (OCR) step was incorporated using GPT-4o-mini (see prompt used
in B).
Data Structuring and Translation: GPT-4o-mini was used to process and translate the extracted
Spanish language question texts. Processing each question separately, the model was prompted to
translate to English and isolate the stem and answer options (see prompt used in B). The structured
outputs function of OpenAI’s API ensured that all MCQs contained a well-defined stem and four
options. For each PDF, the translation of a small random sample of MCQs were manually checked by
a human proficient in English and Spanish.
Answer Extraction: The correct answers were manually extracted from separate answer key PDFs
documents.

3.2.2   De-duplication
To prevent the inclusion of duplicate questions across multiple years, we implemented a de-duplication
pipeline using fuzzy matching based on Levenshtein Distance. The Ministry of Education had noted
on its website that questions would be reused across years, but provided no specific numbers or further
details. Here, we labelled a sample as a duplicate if either the stem alone, or the whole question (stem
and answer options) were above the fuzzy similarity ratio of 90 (where a score of 100 corresponds to a
perfect match). Both potential within-year (between exam) and cross-year duplicates were addressed
during this process. This de-duplication significantly reduced the number of MCQs, as it was found
that many years contained more than 30% duplicate questions (see Fig. 3).




Figure 3: Percentage of duplicate questions (questions in each year that appeared in another year).
Note that 2020 was an outlier year where the majority of questions were repeated.


3.2.3   Human Review and Annotation
To ensure the quality and relevance of the MCQs, each question was manual inspected and annotated
by a pedagogy expert. The expert reviewed each MCQ and edited them based on the following
criteria:

        • Relevance to pedagogy: the question should assess some pedagogical knowledge. Questions
          that were too focused on subject-specific content knowledge without educational context
          were excluded.
        • Clarity and correctness: ambiguous, poorly formatted, incomplete or badly translated MCQs
          were excluded.
        • Context agnostic: MCQs specific to the Chilean context or requiring specific knowledge
          about Chile (for example about specific legislation, or local culture) were excluded.

Where appropriate and necessary, the pedagogy expert made minor edits to MCQs with changes
including translating some terms to reflect international norms and correcting punctuation or
grammatical errors in the translation.


                                                   7
Once this first quality check passed, the pedagogy expert tagged each selected MCQ with the subject
category (e.g. Literacy, Math, History, SEND, ...), the education level (e.g. Primary, Secondary,...)
and the pedagogical domain (e.g. teaching strategies, classroom management, assessment, ...) (see
Figure 1).

3.2.4    Post-Processing and Final Filtering
After running the initial dataset through 36 different LLMs, it was observed that approximately 10%
of the MCQs were consistently answered incorrectly by most models (31 out of 36 LLMs), with
some never being answered correctly at all. This suggested potential issues with the quality of those
questions. Upon closer manual inspection, several flaws were identified in these MCQs, including
grammatical errors in the stem or options, multiple possible correct answers or ambiguity in the
question or options. These MCQs were excluded from the final dataset.
Following these steps, the final dataset included 1143 high-quality, annotated MCQs, which have
been made publicly available for benchmarking the pedagogical knowledge of LLMs14.

3.3     Benchmark Evaluation

Our evaluation pipeline consists of a carefully developed prompt and response parsing script as well
as a complete open-source framework allowing to run a wide range of models from different providers
such as OpenAI, Anthropic, OpenRouter, Fireworks.ai, Amazon Bedrock and others. This is based on
Fabdata-LLM15 developed under the AI-for-Education initiative16, which provides a common Python
interface to a range of different LLM providers. Code implementing the benchmark procedure is
available at https://github.com/AI-for-Education/pedagogy-benchmark.
Following common methodologies and best practices in the LLM benchmarks field [4, 26, 15, 2, 13,
5, 8], we used a few-shot prompting technique, and used the same prompt for all models. The prompt
template (full example can be seen in C) used for the evaluation was:

            Prompt Template

            The following are example multiple choice questions (with answers).
            Question and options 1
            Correct answer 1
            Question and options 2
            Correct answer 2
            Question and options 3
            Correct answer 3

            Answer the following real question using same answer format:
            Question and options (to answer)

            Only answer the real question.
            Only provide the letter for your answer.
            Stop exactly after the letter.

Three fixed few-shot examples were selected at random within each subject area. All questions from
that subject area used the same few-shot examples, and those three questions were not used in the
benchmark. There were seven subject areas, and so out of the total of 920 general pedagogy MCQs,
21 were used as few-shot examples and the CDPK benchmark accuracy is determined over 899 tested
questions. For SEND there were 223 MCQs, and the benchmark accuracy is determined over 220
tested questions.
We conducted preliminary experiments to test various configurations of the prompt and response
parsing algorithms. First, this iterative process involved adjustments to the phrasing of instructions to
improve clarity and reduce ambiguity. Initial experiments with first versions of the prompt showed
  14https://huggingface.co/AI-for-Education/pedagogy-benchmark
  15https://github.com/AI-for-Education/fabdata-llm
  16https://ai-for-education.org/


                                                   8
that it was working well for state-of-the-art models which were able to follow instructions precisely,
but less well for smaller models with reduced instruction following capabilities. Second, it involved
adjustments to the parsing logic to handle edge cases such as incomplete or badly formatted outputs.
Again, early experiments with the parsing script showed a negative bias for models with few parameters,
preventing them from being evaluated correctly. The parsing script was thus implemented to handle
deviations from the strict expected format mentioned in the prompt so that outputs such as "Answer
A", "Answer: A" or "Correct Answer: A", where a clear answer choice could be unambiguously
extracted, would be included. Through these experiments, we identified a prompt and a parsing script
that worked consistently across a diverse set of models, especially of different sizes and capabilities.
Model performance was assessed using overall accuracy (percentage of correctly answered questions).
Specifically, we computed the exact match rate between the model’s selected answer letter (after
being parsed as described above) and the correct answer. Models exhibiting more than 5% of badly
formatted responses (responses where a clear choice option could not be extracted) were considered
to be unable to perform the benchmark. The results of these models were not considered further, and
they are excluded from the leaderboard.
LLMs often employ stochastic decoding strategies (e.g., token sampling or beam search), which can
lead to variability in their outputs. To evaluate the stability of our benchmark given stochastic LLM
responses we performed an experiment in which we ran the 899 CDPK questions 20 times. To limit
the computational cost this was done with a subset of 8 models sampled across the range of obtained
accuracies. Over these 8 models the maximum standard deviation of accuracy (over the 20 runs) was
0.43%. This shows that our test procedure and result scores are robust and repeatable.
In the results below we report accuracies with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals obtained from
resampling questions with replacement 1000 times, separately for each model.

3.4   Answer position selection bias

It has been shown that LLMs can exhibit a selection bias when evaluated on multiple-choice questions
[29, 24, 18, 9]. The main causes being reported are a token-level bias and positional bias. Token-
level bias refers to when models favour particular answer tokens due to their overall probability of
occurrence, for example the token "A" might appear more frequently in English than the token "D".
Positional bias refers to a potential bias to favour the answer in a particular position presented options,
i.e. favouring the answer listed last as it is most recent in the context window.
To test for these effects, we ran a second experiment with the CDPK dataset. We generated four
configurations where the correct answer appeared in each possible position (A, B, C, D). In each case,
the correct answer was swapped with the original answer in that place so ordering of the two other
options was preserved.
We indeed found a selection bias for some of the models tested (see Fig. 4) but contrary to [29]
who showed a preference for response A, we found that some models exhibit a negative bias against
selecting option D. However, this approach cannot separate token-level and positional bias. In the
CDPK dataset, the correct answers are approximately balanced, and our main single-run results
(brown) are very close to the average of the 4 different answer position runs (purple).

4     Results
4.1   Cross-Domain Pedagogical Knowledge (CDPK) Benchmark

At the time of the writing, 97 LLMs have been tested on The Pedagogy Benchmark, including closed-
and open-source models, from a range of providers, and covering a wide range of model sizes and
inference costs. Figure 5 and Table 2 show the performance of a subset of models. All results can be
found in Appendix D (Table 5).
Accuracies range from 28% (Llama-3.2 1B) to 89% for the current leader, Google’s Gemini 2.5 Pro
model. Closed-source models dominate at the top of the leaderboard (Figure 6), with 9 out of the top
10 being closed models from OpenAI, Google and Anthropic. However, the fifth-place model with
87% accuracy is the open-source Deepseek R1 (May 2025 release). It is also noteworthy that the
many of the top-models are thinking models (Figure 7) which are fine-tuned for inference-time chain
of thought reasoning.


                                                    9
Figure 4: Test of a subset of models for a selection bias. In particular, some models exhibit a selection
bias when the correct answer is the index D (and in 4th position).




Figure 5: Accuracy on the Pedagogy Benchmark (CDPK) for a subset of models. Error bars show
95% bootstrap confidence intervals


 Model                          Accuracy    Company        Model                 Accuracy    Company
 Gemini-2.5 Pro                   88.77     Google         Qwen-3 8B               73.53     Alibaba
 o3                               87.88     OpenAI         Gemma-3 27B             72.64     Google
 Claude Opus 4 Thinking (low)     87.43     Anthropic      Phi-4                   72.19     Microsoft
 Deepseek R1 (May ’25)            86.65     DeepSeek-AI    Yi-Large                71.52     01.AI
 Gemini-2.5 Flash                 85.54     Google         Sonar                   70.75     Perplexity
 Claude Sonnet 4                  84.76     Anthropic      Jamba 1.6 Large         69.86     AI21labs
 Qwen-3 32B                       82.42     Alibaba        GPT-4o Mini             69.19     OpenAI
 o4-Mini                          81.98     OpenAI         Hunyuan Large           68.19     Tencent
 Grok-3                           81.76     xAI            Claude-3.5 Haiku        63.29     Anthropic
 Llama-4 Maverick                 81.65     Meta           Nova Micro              63.18     Amazon
 Doubao-1.5 Pro                   80.76     ByteDance      LFM-7B                  61.85     Liquid AI
 Qwen-3 235B (22B active)         80.65     Alibaba        Jamba 1.6 Mini          61.07     AI21labs
 Mistral Medium 3                 79.98     Mistral        Gemini-1.5 Flash 8B     59.18     Google
 Llama-3.1 405B                   78.75     Meta           Llama-3.2 11B           59.07     Meta
 Qwen-3 14B                       78.53     Alibaba        LFM-3B                  57.06     Liquid AI
 GPT-4o                           78.31     OpenAI         Phi-3.5 Mini            56.06     Microsoft
 Command A                        77.86     Cohere         Ministral 3B            52.39     Mistral
 Gemini-2.0 Flash-Lite            77.64     Google         Gemma-3 4B              52.39     Google
 LearnLM 1.5 Pro                  77.31     Google         GPT-3.5 Turbo           52.28     OpenAI
 Mistral Small 3.1 24B            75.86     Mistral        Command R7B             46.05     Cohere
 Nova Pro                         75.31     Amazon         Llama-3.2 1B            28.03     Meta
 Llama-4 Scout                    74.53     Meta

Table 2: Accuracy scores on The Pedagogy Benchmark (for a subset of models), sorted from highest
(top left) to lowest (bottom right).



                                                   10
        Figure 6: Accuracy on the Pedagogy Benchmark (CDPK) by Weights Availability.




        Figure 7: Accuracy on the Pedagogy Benchmark (CDPK) by Reasoning Capability


4.1.1   Estimated human baseline

Based on the results of more than 25,000 teachers from 2017 to 2021, the mean expected score of a
human trainee teacher would be expected to be approximately 50% on The Pedagogy Benchmark.
However, this is only an estimate, and any interpretation should be made with caution. Question-level
human results are not available for these exams, so we cannot directly quantify human accuracy on the
specific questions included in these benchmarks. Instead, we have estimated this based on aggregate
subject- and year-level results by allocating each benchmark question the average accuracy of the
paper from which it was drawn. We tested four different methods, all of which produced an estimated
accuracy for human teachers on CDPK of around 50%. It is also important to emphasize that teachers
typically take exams only in the subjects they teach, not in all subjects. Therefore, evaluating overall
human performance on the CDPK benchmark is difficult, as no individual teacher answers all its
constituent questions.

4.1.2   Accuracy vs Cost: The Value Frontier

For each benchmarked model we also record the inference costs, where available. Note that
occasionally experimental models are provided free of charge without any price information; such
models do not appear in this value analysis. Inference costs are usually provided as USD per million
tokens, and often have separate rates for input tokens (user prompt and context) and output tokens
(model generated responses). Here we use just input token costs, as the intention was to benchmark
knowledge and the prompt is set up to encourage models to answer directly. However, in the era of
reasoning models, thinking traces are charged as output tokens, even if they are not directly accessible
as the end user. For open-source models there are often multiple hosting providers available. This
complicates benchmarking as different providers can be running different versions of the model (e.g.
using different quantisations of the weights), or using other inference-time optimisations or shortcuts.
We try to find the most reliable provider for any given model in its original quantisation, and report
the input costs for that provider. This means sometimes models may be hosted elsewhere at lower
cost than we report, but we cannot be sure the benchmark performance would be the same.
Figure 8 shows these results. The left panel shows the current Pareto value frontier – technically the
convex upper hull. We can see there are models available at a wide range of inference costs, spanning
nearly four orders of magnitude from 1¢ to nearly $100 per million input tokens. It is also noteworthy
that the most expensive model does not have the highest accuracy although the cheapest model is the


                                                  11
worst performing. For any particular inference cost there is a range of around 20 percentage point
difference in accuracy between the lowest and highest scores for models near that price point.
The current value frontier is illustrated in grey and includes the following models (in increasing order
of performance and cost): Llama 3.2 1B (Meta), LFM 7b (Liquid AI), Qwen 3 8B (Alibaba), Qwen 3
32B (Alibaba), Gemini 2.5 Flash (Google) and Gemini 2.5 Pro (Google). It’s interesting that while
the majority of the top performing models were proprietary, on the value-frontier more than half
are open-weight (Llama and Qwen families). However, at higher costs, closed models are ahead.
Google’s latest family of models provide the best value above 10¢/Mtoken. Between 5-10¢/Mtoken
Qwen 3 models provide best value, although it worth noting that models from ByteDance (Doubau 1.5,
Lite and Pro) and Google (the previous generation of Gemini 2.0 Flash and Flash Lite) are very close
to the frontier in this range. At the low end of cost it’s interesting that a novel non-transformer-based
architecture from Liquid AI (LFM-7B) performs very well (62% accuracy for 1¢/Mtoken), although
Mistral Nemo is not far below (57% accuracy for the same price).
Figure 8 (right panel) shows how this value frontier has evolved over time, showing the rapid pace
of improvement and reduction in cost for all performance levels. For example, at $0.10 per million
tokens, the performance has increased from 50% (April 2024) to 70% (November 2024) to 82%
(June 2025). 82% exceeds the best performance available in April 2024 at cost which is reduced by a
factor of 150 (Anthropic Claude 3 Opus, 76% at $15/Mtoken). That top performance from April
2024 can now almost be achieved by the open-source Qwen 3 8B model for 3.5¢, representing an
over 400x reduction in cost. It’s also noteworthy that 8B parameters allows for local use on relatively
accessible hardware.




Figure 8: Left: Trade-off between performance and cost, the best models being on the value frontier
(grey line). Right:Value frontier over time.


4.1.3   Accuracy vs Size: Scaling of Pedagogical Knowledge
Figure 9 shows how performance on our pedagogy benchmarks scales with model size. Note
this analysis only includes models for which accurate parameter counts are openly available (i.e.
open-weight models). Most of the major closed model providers do not provide architectural details
like full parameter counts for their flagship models. As we saw above for cost, the largest model is
not the best performing although the smallest model is the worst performing. The Pareto efficiency
frontier shows a sharp drop-off below around 8B parameters. However, even at 7B parameters there is
a range of performance of over 20 percentage points (from 46% to 66%).
Model size is the crucial parameter which informs the hardware necessary to use the model. Models
with more than 70B parameters require multiple high-end GPUs or specialized clusters while 13-70B
parameters models require a single high-end GPU (with 40-80GB VRAM, costing tens of thousands
of dollars). Models with 7-13B parameters can run on a high-end consumer GPU with 16-24GB
VRAM (costing thousands of dollars) while 1-7B parameter models are accessible with gaming
computers or laptops with 8-16GB VRAM. Models in the 1-3B parameter range begin to be usable
offline on mobile devices.
The Pareto frontier for size on CDPK includes the models Llama 3.2 1B (Meta), LFM-3B (Liquid
AI), Gemma 3n E4B (Google), Qwen 3 8B, 14B and 32B (Alibaba) and Deepseek R1. Gemma 3n
E4B is a model optimized for use in everyday devices, such as phones, laptops, and tablets, and again
Liquid AI appears with the non-transformer architecture.


                                                  12
Figure 9: Left: Trade-off between performance and model size, the best models being on the efficiency
frontier (grey line). Right: Efficiency frontier over time.


4.1.4    Variation between Subject Categories
Figure 10 (left panel) shows subject-specific sub-scores for a small selection of the best (top row)
and worst (bottom row) performing models. The right panel shows the range of sub-scores over the
different subject categories, and shows the top and bottom performing categories for each model.
This reveals two key distinctions between model tiers. Firstly, the bottom 15 models demonstrate a
much higher performance variance across subjects, evidenced by their wider ’Performance Range’
bars. Secondly, these lower-performing models consistently achieve their best scores (indicated by
stars) in the Technology and General categories. This specialization is absent in the top 15 models,
which show less variance and a greater diversity in their peak-performance subjects. This suggests
that the smaller models excel primarily in what may be the least challenging categories, while top
models are more versatile.




Figure 10: Pedagogy Benchmark (CDPK) accuracy by subject area. Left: accuracy in individual
subject areas are shown for three of the 15 top performing models (top) and three of the 15 lowest
performing models (bottom). Right: the spread of performance over subjects for the top 15 and
bottom 15 performing models. The highest and lowest subject accuracy are indicated by marker
colour.


4.2     Special Educational Needs and Disabilities (SEND) Pedagogy Benchmark

As described above, the SEND questions were separated because they involve specialist knowledge as
well as teaching and assessment strategies not typically expected for mainstream classroom teachers.
While some SEND needs are addressed in regular schools, many of the scenarios in these questions
refer to cases managed by specialist staff or in special schools. We therefore evaluated the accuracy of
models on the 223 SEND MCQs as a separate SEND-specific pedagogy benchmark17.
Differences in performance between this benchmark and the original Pedagogy Benchmark underscore
the additional challenges associated with SEND-specific pedagogy, as well as the limited availability
  17https://rebrand.ly/sendpedagogy


                                                  13
                                                            Example
    Read the following situation: Rodrigo, a preschool student attending a special language school, is characterized by being
    participative and restless. It is common for him not to finish tasks during classes, as he gets up from his seat, hides the
    school supplies of his peers, or starts doing some activity different from what the special education teacher proposed,
    regularly distracting himself. Considering the described situation, in which of the following areas should support focus to
    reduce barriers to learning for the student?

    A) Social
    B) Health
    C) Cognitive
    D) Emotional

    Correct answer: C

                                Table 3: Example question from the SEND dataset.



of high-quality resources in this area. While the results of the two benchmarks were overall quite
highly correlated (𝑟 = 0.94), it’s interesting that higher performing models (above 60% accuracy)
tended to do better on general pedagogy than SEND, while for lower performing models, this was
reversed. The results of all the models can be found in the Appendix (Table 6).




Figure 11: Accuracy on the SEND Benchmark for a subset of models. Error bars show bootstrap 95%
confidence intervals.




                        Figure 12: Pedagogy (CDPK) vs SEND Benchmark Performance


5      Discussion
We introduce two novel multiple-choice LLM benchmarks of pedagogical knowledge, based on
professional teacher exam questions developed by the Education Quality Agency and Center for
Pedagogical Improvement, Experimentation, and Research of the Chilean Ministry of Education18.
The first, CDPK, focuses on a broad range of general pedagogical knowledge across different
     18https://www.cpeip.cl/cpeip/


                                                               14
educational levels, subjects and pedagogical domains. The second, SEND, focuses on pedagogy
related to special educational needs and disabilities. Using genuine teacher exam questions was
important to ensure that the benchmark reflects real-world needs and provides an authentic measure
of the pedagogical knowledge valued in teacher practice.
Previous benchmarks focus on content knowledge, measuring what models know about subject matter.
Evaluating pedagogical knowledge reveals what models understand about how that content can be
effectively taught and assessed. Both of these knowledge components are crucial for the development
and selection of effective educational AI tools. For example, it is helpful to understand whether a
tool can accurately answer teachers’ queries about science principles used in their lesson. However,
determining whether the tool can also provide high-quality, age-appropriate guidance on how these
principles can be taught effectively is even more advantageous. The Pedagogy Benchmark results help
identify which LLMs are best suited for use in AI educational tools where pedagogical knowledge
guides their outputs, including lesson planning assistants, assessment support tools or professional
learning platforms.
We apply these novel benchmarks to a broad range of 97 LLMs, with inference costs ranging from
$0.01-$100 per million tokens, and sizes ranging from 1B to 700B parameters. Accuracy in CDPK
ranges from 28% (Meta Llama 3.2 1B), to 89% (Google Gemini 2.5 Pro). For SEND, accuracy
ranges from 29% (Meta Llama 3.2 1B), to 86% (Google Gemini 2.5 Pro). The best performing
models were those specifically fine-tuned for and equipped with thinking or reasoning functionality.
It’s interesting that although these were explicitly designed as knowledge benchmarks, reasoning
appears to improve performance. It is also noteworthy that the majority of the top performers are
proprietary closed-weight models, with Deepseek R1 (an open-weight reasoning model) being the
notable exception.
We also provide inference costs, which allows us to chart the Pareto value frontier. This analysis
reveals the models which achieve the best pedagogical knowledge performance at any specific price
point. The last 18 months have seen large increases in performance across the full range of inference
costs (spanning four orders of magnitude). For example, at $0.10 per million tokens, the performance
has increased from 50% (April 2024) to 70% (November 2024) to 82% (June 2025). This analysis
also demonstrates that there is no single best model; rather, the optimal choice is highly dependent
on the specific application’s constraints regarding cost, performance requirements, and deployment
environment.
The scaling of pedagogical knowledge performance with both inference cost and model size are
particularly important when considering applications running on-device and which must support
offline use cases. This is important for many LMIC contexts in which internet connectivity may
be limited. A notable example of this is the Liquid AI LFM-7B model19, which, with its novel
non-transformer architecture, scores 62% accuracy on CDPK at a very low inference cost of $0.01
per million tokens. While this is a proprietary model which may not be available for offline on-device
deployment, its performance is promising. Similarly, Google’s Gemma-3n E4B, an open-weight
model explicitly developed for use on local devices such as phones, tablets and laptops scores 64%.
These examples highlight rapid progress and if these trends continue it seems likely that we will have
on-device models which can saturate the pedagogy benchmarks within a relatively short timeframe.
As question-level human performance data is not available, we estimate approximate human accuracy
based on the past performance of Chilean teachers on complete exams to be approximately 50%. It is
crucial to recognise, however, that these benchmarks exclusively assess pedagogical knowledge. These
benchmarks do not, and cannot, measure the many other critical practical dimensions of teaching,
such as classroom management, student-teacher relationships, and the ability to inspire and motivate
learners, all of which are fundamental to effective teaching practice.

5.1   Limitations

We have provided bootstrap confidence intervals around the accuracy scores, and investigated reliability
over multiple repeated runs. This shows care must be taken interpreting the precise rank ordering,
as the difference between the first place and second place model is less than 1% which may not be
meaningful. However, over the full range of performance there are clearly robust differences between
models.
  19https://www.liquid.ai/blog/introducing-lfm-7b-setting-new-standards-for-efficient-language-models


                                                   15
We have relied on a single source of questions for these benchmarks - the Chilean Ministry of
Education. These are a comprehensive, broad, well-researched and designed set of exams. Care
was taken to remove any questions judged to be too specific to the Chilean context or requiring
specific knowledge about Chile. Nevertheless, pedagogy is not universal, and the principles, priorities
and practices valued in the Chilean educational system may differ from those in other countries or
cultural contexts. Additionally, all our questions have been translated from Spanish into English.
Translation can sometimes lose subtle nuances. Key pedagogical terms or situational descriptions
might carry slightly different connotations in English, which could affect models’ interpretation
of the question. We did search for other similar exams, but many countries do not have formal
exams covering pedagogical knowledge, opting instead for experiential training and live classroom
assessment. We did find some similar exams from other countries, but these were not available under
an open-license so could not be used in a public dataset of the sort we aimed to produce here.
Our approach uses a single standardised prompt to ensure fair comparison between all models. But
this may not best capture the capabilities of all models. For example, we observe thinking models,
which have a separate output space for reasoning, generally perform better. It’s possible an alternative
chain-of-thought prompting approach that invited non-reasoning models to think carefully about the
options step-by-step rather than answering directly could improve performance. Similarly, we use a
few-shot prompt with three example questions. While this is recommended for non-reasoning models,
it may not be optimal for reasoning models. The particular few-shot examples were fixed (for each
subject), for replicability and consistency, but different selections of examples might differentially
affect performance of different models.
As our dataset has not been publicly released prior to this paper, we believe that the results presented
here should be free of contamination or leakage. While some of the source exam papers are available
online, they were in Spanish without correct answers directly linked. Contamination may be an issue
for the future, but following standard practice we request users of our dataset not to reveal examples
from the dataset online.
The SEND and CDPK benchmark results are highly correlated. We have not explored here the degree
to which their results might also be directly correlated to other benchmarks like MMLU or GPQA.
We therefore cannot be sure of the degree to which we are isolating specific knowledge of pedagogy,
versus evaluating a model’s overall knowledge base and ability to answer factual MCQs. However, we
believe our new benchmarks are useful for several reasons. We provide online leaderboards which we
update with new models, and we present inference costs alongside the models to allow direct value
judgements. Even if they are correlated to other knowledge benchmarks our questions are directly
testing pedagogy which is important for educational applications. Further, as above, these benchmarks
are likely not contaminated by having models fine-tuned directly on the questions. We hope they
will be particularly useful for informing the choice of smaller and cheaper models for educational
applications in resource-limited contexts.

5.2   Future Directions

We highlight the need to move beyond general knowledge benchmarks and focus on specialized
domains like education. We see our pedagogical knowledge benchmarks as a small step in the path
towards a robust ecosystem of education-related evaluations of generative AI models and products.
For model developers, developments in this area can guide fine-tuning efforts to improve pedagogical
practice and enhance outcomes for learners globally. For EdTech product developers, our leaderboards
and future work in this direction can serve as a practical guide for model selection, enabling them to
make informed decisions that balance pedagogical performance with the inference cost and latency
constraints of their specific tools.
While MCQs are a well-established approach for standardized knowledge assessment, they do not
evaluate an LLM’s generative or interactive capabilities. For instance, a benchmark question can
assess if a model can identify the best teaching strategy from a list, but not how well it can generate a
novel lesson plan, create differentiated materials, or scaffold a concept in a conversational turn-by-turn
interaction with a student or teacher. As noted in the Introduction, this distinction between pedagogical
knowledge and pedagogical practice is crucial to keep in mind. Here we explicitly focussed on
pedagogical knowledge as it can be more easily tested across a wide range of language models.
Considering how this can be contextualised and extended to more realistic evaluations of models’
real-world pedagogical practice is an important area for future work. This could involve designing


                                                   16
new evaluation paradigms that move beyond static, multiple-choice formats. Future benchmarks could
involve scenario-based assessments where models must generate open-ended responses to complex
classroom situations, with evaluation conducted via expert-designed rubrics. Further, developing
simulated classroom interactions could test an AI’s ability to respond dynamically and appropriately
to student or teacher inputs.
While acknowledging the difference between knowledge and practice, it is also possible that these
are related in LLMs. For teachers, there is evidence that pedagogical knowledge aligns with many
practical measures of teaching quality [21]. Similarly, a model that produces pedagogically sound
behaviour is likely to be able to answer pedagogical knowledge questions about that behaviour.
Although we do not test it explicitly, we hope our benchmarks provide useful information that is
related to pedagogical practice in real applications. We hope that future work will compare our
benchmarks to direct measures of models’ behaviour to elucidate any such relationship.
Finally, as models approach, and in many cases exceed, human performance on these knowledge
benchmarks, a dedicated research agenda into their responsible and ethical deployment is essential.
The increasing capability of these models brings risks of misuse, such as promoting over-reliance
among novice teachers, creating an illusion of expertise that could lead to harm if incorrect advice is
followed, or propagating the subtle cultural and pedagogical biases inherent in their training data.
Future work must therefore investigate the development of clear ethical guardrails, robust user training
protocols, and "human-in-the-loop" systems to ensure that these powerful tools are deployed safely
and effectively, augmenting teacher professionalism rather than attempting to replace it.

5.3   Conclusion

This paper establishes a foundational benchmark for LLM pedagogical knowledge, revealing that
models are rapidly mastering the principles of effective teaching. Yet, this development highlights an
important challenge: the distinction between a theoretical knowledge of teaching and its translation
into effective classroom practice. Therefore, the central task for the field is twofold: to continue
building these vital, education-focused benchmarks including those which assess practical application
of knowledge, while simultaneously working to gather supporting evidence of impact from real world
testing. Only by addressing both can we ensure AI serves as a truly effective and responsible tool for
teachers and learners across the globe.


Acknowledgements

We thank the Agencia de la Calidad de Educación y Centro de Perfeccionamiento, Experimentación e
Investigaciones Pedagógicas (Education Quality Agency and Center for Pedagogical Improvement,
Experimentation, and Research), https://www.cpeip.cl/cpeip/ of the Chilean Ministry of Education
for developing and sharing the exams we sourced questions from.
Funding for the AI-for-Education initiative has been provided by Jacobs Foundation, the Foreign
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) of the UK Government, and the Gates Foundation.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of these funders.


References
 [1] R. K. Arora, J. Wei, R. S. Hicks, P. Bowman, J. Quinonero-Candela, F. Tsimpourlas, M. Sharman,
     M. Shah, A. Vallone, A. Beutel, J. Heidecke, and K. Singhal. HealthBench: Evaluating Large
     Language Models Towards Improved Human Health, 2025.

 [2] S. Biderman, H. Schoelkopf, L. Sutawika, L. Gao, J. Tow, B. Abbasi, A. F. Aji, P. S. Am-
     manamanchi, S. Black, J. Clive, et al. Lessons from the trenches on reproducible evaluation of
     language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14782, 2024.

 [3] S. K. Bitew, J. Deleu, C. Develder, and T. Demeester. Distractor generation for multiple-
     choice questions with predictive prompting and large language models, 2023. URL https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2307.16338.


                                                  17
 [4] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam,
     G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
 [5] Y. Chang, X. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Wu, L. Yang, K. Zhu, H. Chen, X. Yi, C. Wang, Y. Wang, et al.
     A survey on evaluation of large language models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and
     Technology, 15(3):1–45, 2024.
 [6] W.-L. Chiang, L. Zheng, Y. Sheng, A. N. Angelopoulos, T. Li, D. Li, H. Zhang, B. Zhu,
     M. Jordan, J. E. Gonzalez, et al. Chatbot arena: An open platform for evaluating llms by human
     preference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04132, 2024.
 [7] H.-B. Clark, M. Dowland, L. Benton, R. Budai, I. K. Keskin, E. Searle, M. Gregory, M. Hodierne,
     and J. Roberts. Auto-Evaluation: A Critical Measure in Driving Improvements in Quality and
     Safety of AI-Generated Lesson Resources. The AI + Open Education Initiative, Jan. 2025. URL
     https://aiopeneducation.pubpub.org/pub/i36sncz8/release/3.
 [8] Z. Guo, R. Jin, C. Liu, Y. Huang, D. Shi, L. Yu, Y. Liu, J. Li, B. Xiong, D. Xiong, et al.
     Evaluating large language models: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19736,
     2023.
 [9] V. Gupta, D. Pantoja, C. Ross, A. Williams, and M. Ung. Changing answer order can decrease
     mmlu accuracy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19470, 2024.
[10] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt. Measuring
     massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
[11] I. Jurenka, M. Kunesch, K. R. McKee, D. Gillick, S. Zhu, S. Wiltberger, S. M. Phal, K. Hermann,
     D. Kasenberg, A. Bhoopchand, et al. Towards responsible development of generative ai for
     education: An evaluation-driven approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12687, 2024.
[12] S. Khoo, G. Chua, and R. Shong. Minorbench: A hand-built benchmark for content-based risks
     for children, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.10242.
[13] M. T. R. Laskar, S. Alqahtani, M. S. Bari, M. Rahman, M. A. M. Khan, H. Khan, I. Jahan,
     A. Bhuiyan, C. W. Tan, M. R. Parvez, et al. A systematic survey and critical review on evaluating
     large language models: Challenges, limitations, and recommendations. In Proceedings of the
     2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 13785–13816,
     2024.
[14] J. Macina, N. Daheim, I. Hakimi, M. Kapur, I. Gurevych, and M. Sachan. Mathtutorbench:
     A benchmark for measuring open-ended pedagogical capabilities of llm tutors, 2025. URL
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18940.
[15] T. R. McIntosh, T. Susnjak, N. Arachchilage, T. Liu, P. Watters, and M. N. Halgamuge.
     Inadequacies of large language model benchmarks in the era of generative artificial intelligence.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09880, 2024.
[16] P. Miller and K. DiCerbo. LLM Based Math Tutoring: Challenges and Dataset, July 2024. URL
     https://osf.io/5zwv3_v1.
[17] O. Nancy, D. Stefania, and L. Andrew. A benchmark for math misconceptions: Bridging gaps
     in middle school algebra with ai-supported instruction, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.
     03765.
[18] P. Pezeshkpour and E. Hruschka. Large language models sensitivity to the order of options in
     multiple-choice questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11483, 2023.
[19] L. Phan, A. Gatti, Z. Han, N. Li, J. Hu, H. Zhang, S. Shi, M. Choi, A. Agrawal, A. Chopra,
     A. Khoja, R. Kim, J. Hausenloy, O. Zhang, M. Mazeika, D. Anderson, T. Nguyen, M. Mahmood,
     F. Feng, S. Y. Feng, H. Zhao, M. Yu, V. Gangal, C. Zou, Z. Wang, J. P. Wang, P. Kumar,
     O. Pokutnyi, R. Gerbicz, S. Popov, J.-C. Levin, M. Kazakov, J. Schmitt, G. Galgon, A. Sanchez,
     Y. Lee, W. Yeadon, S. Sauers, M. Roth, C. Agu, S. Riis, F. Giska, S. Utpala, Z. Giboney,


                                                 18
G. M. Goshu, J. o. A. Xavier, S.-J. Crowson, M. M. Naiya, N. Burns, L. Finke, Z. Cheng,
H. Park, F. Fournier-Facio, J. Wydallis, M. Nandor, A. Singh, T. Gehrunger, J. Cai, B. McCarty,
D. Duclosel, J. Nam, J. Zampese, R. G. Hoerr, A. Bacho, G. A. Loume, A. Galal, H. Cao, A. C.
Garretson, D. Sileo, Q. Ren, D. Cojoc, P. Arkhipov, U. Qazi, L. Li, S. Motwani, C. S. d. Witt,
E. Taylor, J. Veith, E. Singer, T. D. Hartman, P. Rissone, J. Jin, J. W. L. Shi, C. G. Willcocks,
J. Robinson, A. Mikov, A. Prabhu, L. Tang, X. Alapont, J. L. Uro, K. Zhou, E. d. O. Santos,
A. P. Maksimov, E. Vendrow, K. Zenitani, J. Guillod, Y. Li, J. Vendrow, V. Kuchkin, N. Ze-An,
P. Marion, D. Efremov, J. Lynch, K. Liang, A. Gritsevskiy, D. Martinez, B. Pageler, N. Crispino,
D. Zvonkine, N. W. Fraga, S. Soori, O. Press, H. Tang, J. Salazar, S. R. Green, L. Brüssel,
M. Twayana, A. Dieuleveut, T. R. Rogers, W. Zhang, B. Li, J. Yang, A. Rao, G. Loiseau,
M. Kalinin, M. Lukas, C. Manolescu, S. Mishra, A. G. K. Kamdoum, T. Kreiman, T. Hogg,
A. Jin, C. Bosio, G. Sun, B. P. Coppola, T. Tarver, H. Heidinger, R. Sayous, S. Ivanov, J. M.
Cavanagh, J. Shen, J. M. Imperial, P. Schwaller, S. Senthilkuma, A. M. Bran, A. Dehghan,
A. Algaba, B. Verbeken, D. Noever, R. P. V, L. Schut, I. Sucholutsky, E. Zheltonozhskii,
D. Lim, R. Stanley, S. Sivarajan, T. Yang, J. Maar, J. Wykowski, M. Oller, J. Sandlin, A. Sahu,
Y. Hu, S. Fish, N. Heydari, A. Apronti, K. Rawal, T. G. Vilchis, Y. Zu, M. Lackner, J. Koppel,
J. Nguyen, D. S. Antonenko, S. Chern, B. Zhao, P. Arsene, A. Goldfarb, S. Ivanov, R. Poświata,
C. Wang, D. Li, D. Crisostomi, A. Achilleos, B. Myklebust, A. Sen, D. Perrella, N. Kaparov,
M. H. Inlow, A. Zang, E. Thornley, D. Orel, V. Poritski, S. Ben-David, Z. Berger, P. Whitfill,
M. Foster, D. Munro, L. Ho, D. B. Hava, A. Kuchkin, R. Lauff, D. Holmes, F. Sommerhage,
K. Schneider, Z. Kazibwe, N. Stambaugh, M. Singh, I. Magoulas, D. Clarke, D. H. Kim,
F. M. Dias, V. Elser, K. P. Agarwal, V. E. G. Vilchis, I. Klose, C. Demian, U. Anantheswaran,
A. Zweiger, G. Albani, J. Li, N. Daans, M. Radionov, V. Rozhoň, Z. Ma, C. Stump, M. Berkani,
J. Platnick, V. Nevirkovets, L. Basler, M. Piccardo, F. Jeanplong, N. Cohen, J. Tkadlec, P. Rosu,
P. Padlewski, S. Barzowski, K. Montgomery, A. Menezes, A. Patel, Z. Wang, J. Tucker-Foltz,
J. Stade, T. Goertzen, F. Kazemi, J. Milbauer, J. A. Ambay, A. Shukla, Y. C. L. Labrador,
A. Givré, H. Wolff, V. Rossbach, M. F. Aziz, Y. Kaddar, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, J. Pan, A. Terpin,
N. Muennighoff, H. Schoelkopf, E. Zheng, A. Carmi, A. Jones, J. Shah, E. D. L. Brown, K. Zhu,
M. Bartolo, R. Wheeler, A. Ho, S. Barkan, J. Wang, M. Stehberger, E. Kretov, K. Sridhar, Z. EL-
Wasif, A. Zhang, D. Pyda, J. Tam, D. M. Cunningham, V. Goryachev, D. Patramanis, M. Krause,
A. Redenti, D. Bugas, D. Aldous, J. Lai, S. Coleman, M. Bahaloo, J. Xu, S. Lee, S. Zhao,
N. Tang, M. K. Cohen, M. Carroll, O. Paradise, J. H. Kirchner, S. Steinerberger, M. Ovchynnikov,
J. O. Matos, A. Shenoy, B. A. d. O. Junior, M. Wang, Y. Nie, P. Giordano, P. Petersen, A. Sztyber-
Betley, P. Shukla, J. Crozier, A. Pinto, S. Verma, P. Joshi, Z.-X. Yong, A. Tee, J. Andréoletti,
O. Weller, R. Singhal, G. Zhang, A. Ivanov, S. Khoury, H. Mostaghimi, K. Thaman, Q. Chen,
T. Q. Khánh, J. Loader, S. Cavalleri, H. Szlyk, Z. Brown, J. Roberts, W. Alley, K. Sun, R. Stendall,
M. Lamparth, A. Reuel, T. Wang, H. Xu, S. G. Raparthi, P. Hernández-Cámara, F. Martin,
D. Malishev, T. Preu, T. Korbak, M. Abramovitch, D. Williamson, Z. Chen, B. Bálint, M. S.
Bari, P. Kassani, Z. Wang, B. Ansarinejad, L. P. Goswami, Y. Sun, H. Elgnainy, D. Tordera,
G. Balabanian, E. Anderson, L. Kvistad, A. J. Moyano, R. Maheshwari, A. Sakor, M. Eron,
I. C. McAlister, J. Gimenez, I. Enyekwe, A. F. D.O., S. Shah, X. Zhou, F. Kamalov, R. Clark,
S. Abdoli, T. Santens, K. Meer, H. K. Wang, K. Ramakrishnan, E. Chen, A. Tomasiello, G. B. D.
Luca, S.-Z. Looi, V.-K. Le, N. Kolt, N. Mündler, A. Semler, E. Rodman, J. Drori, C. J. Fossum,
M. Jagota, R. Pradeep, H. Fan, T. Shah, J. Eicher, M. Chen, K. Thaman, W. Merrill, C. Harris,
J. Gross, I. Gusev, A. Sharma, S. Agnihotri, P. Zhelnov, S. Usawasutsakorn, M. Mofayezi,
S. Bogdanov, A. Piperski, M. Carauleanu, D. K. Zhang, D. Ler, R. Leventov, I. Soroko, T. Jansen,
P. Lauer, J. Duersch, V. Taamazyan, W. Morak, W. Ma, W. Held, T. D. Huy, R. Xian, A. R.
Zebaze, M. Mohamed, J. N. Leser, M. X. Yuan, L. Yacar, J. Lengler, H. Shahrtash, E. Oliveira,
J. W. Jackson, D. E. Gonzalez, A. Zou, M. Chidambaram, T. Manik, H. Haffenden, D. Stander,
A. Dasouqi, A. Shen, E. Duc, B. Golshani, D. Stap, M. Uzhou, A. B. Zhidkovskaya, L. Lewark,
M. Vincze, D. Wehr, C. Tang, Z. Hossain, S. Phillips, J. Muzhen, F. Ekström, A. Hammon,
O. Patel, N. Remy, F. Farhidi, G. Medley, F. Mohammadzadeh, M. Peñaflor, H. Kassahun,
A. Friedrich, C. Sparrow, T. Sakal, O. Dhamane, A. K. Mirabadi, E. Hallman, M. Battaglia,
M. Maghsoudimehrabani, H. Hoang, A. Amit, D. Hulbert, R. Pereira, S. Weber, S. Mensah,
N. Andre, A. Peristyy, C. Harjadi, H. Gupta, S. Malina, S. Albanie, W. Cai, M. Mehkary,
F. Reidegeld, A.-K. Dick, C. Friday, J. Sidhu, W. Kim, M. Costa, H. Gurdogan, B. Weber,
H. Kumar, T. Jiang, A. Agarwal, C. Ceconello, W. S. Vaz, C. Zhuang, H. Park, A. R. Tawfeek,
D. Aggarwal, M. Kirchhof, L. Dai, E. Kim, J. Ferret, Y. Wang, M. Yan, K. Burdzy, L. Zhang,
A. Franca, D. T. Pham, K. Y. Loh, J. Robinson, S. Gul, G. Chhablani, Z. Du, A. Cosma,


                                             19
     C. White, R. Riblet, P. Saxena, J. Votava, V. Vinnikov, E. Delaney, S. Halasyamani, S. M.
     Shahid, J.-C. Mourrat, L. Vetoshkin, R. Bacho, V. Ginis, A. Maksapetyan, F. d. l. Rosa, X. Li,
     G. Malod, L. Lang, J. Laurendeau, F. Adesanya, J. Portier, L. Hollom, V. Souza, Y. A. Zhou,
     Y. Yalın, G. D. Obikoya, L. Arnaboldi, R. M. Pokorny), F. Bigi, K. Bacho, P. Clavier, G. Recchia,
     M. Popescu, N. Shulga, N. M. Tanwie, T. C. Lux, B. Rank, C. Ni, A. Yakimchyk, H. Q. Liu,
     O. Häggström, E. Verkama, H. Narayan, H. Gundlach, L. Brito-Santana, B. Amaro, V. Vajipey,
     R. Grover, Y. Fan, G. P. R. e. Silva, L. Xin, Y. Kratish, J. Łucki, W.-D. Li, J. Xu, K. J.
     Scaria, F. Vargus, F. Habibi, L. T. Lian, E. Rodolà, J. Robins, V. Cheng, D. Grabb, I. Bosio,
     T. Fruhauff, I. Akov, E. J. Y. Lo, H. Qi, X. Jiang, B. Segev, J. Fan, S. Martinson, E. Y. Wang,
     K. Hausknecht, M. P. Brenner, M. Mao, Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, D. Avagian, E. J. Scipio, M. R.
     Siddiqi, A. Ragoler, J. Tan, D. Patil, R. Plecnik, A. Kirtland, R. G. Montecillo, S. Durand, O. F.
     Bodur, Z. Adoul, M. Zekry, G. Douville, A. Karakoc, T. C. B. Santos, S. Shamseldeen, L. Karim,
     A. Liakhovitskaia, N. Resman, N. Farina, J. C. Gonzalez, G. Maayan, S. Hoback, R. D. O. Pena,
     G. Sherman, H. Marĳi, R. Pouriamanesh, W. Wu, G. Demir, S. Mendoza, I. Alarab, J. Cole,
     D. Ferreira, B. Johnson, H. Milliron, M. Safdari, L. Dai, S. Arthornthurasuk, A. Pronin, J. Fan,
     A. Ramirez-Trinidad, A. Cartwright, D. Pottmaier, O. Taheri, D. Outevsky, S. Stepanic, S. Perry,
     L. Askew, R. A. H. Rodríguez, A. Dendane, S. Ali, R. Lorena, K. Iyer, S. M. Salauddin, M. Islam,
     J. Gonzalez, J. Ducey, R. Campbell, M. Somrak, V. Mavroudis, E. Vergo, J. Qin, B. Borbás,
     E. Chu, J. Lindsey, A. Radhakrishnan, A. Jallon, I. McInnis, A. Hoover, S. Möller, S. Bian,
     J. Lai, T. Patwardhan, S. Yue, A. Wang, and D. Hendrycks. Humanity’s last exam. arXiv, 2025.
[20] D. Rein, B. L. Hou, A. C. Stickland, J. Petty, R. Y. Pang, J. Dirani, J. Michael, and S. R. Bowman.
     Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12022, 2023.
[21] W. M. Reynolds and S. Park. Examining the relationship between the Educative Teacher
     Performance Assessment and preservice teachers’ pedagogical content knowledge. Jour-
     nal of Research in Science Teaching, 58(5):721–748, 2021. ISSN 1098-2736. doi:
     10.1002/tea.21676. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/tea.21676. _eprint:
     https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/tea.21676.
[22] L. Team, A. Modi, A. S. Veerubhotla, A. Rysbek, A. Huber, B. Wiltshire, B. Veprek, D. Gillick,
     D. Kasenberg, D. Ahmed, et al. LearnLM: Improving gemini for learning. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2412.16429, 2024.
[23] L. Team, A. Modi, A. S. Veerubhotla, A. Rysbek, A. Huber, A. Anand, A. Bhoopchand,
     B. Wiltshire, D. Gillick, D. Kasenberg, et al. Evaluating gemini in an arena for learning. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2505.24477, 2025.
[24] P. Wang, L. Li, L. Chen, Z. Cai, D. Zhu, B. Lin, Y. Cao, Q. Liu, T. Liu, and Z. Sui. Large
     language models are not fair evaluators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17926, 2023.
[25] S. Wang, T. Xu, H. Li, C. Zhang, J. Liang, J. Tang, P. S. Yu, and Q. Wen. Large language models
     for education: A survey and outlook. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18105, 2024.
[26] X. Wang, B. Ma, C. Hu, L. Weber-Genzel, P. Röttger, F. Kreuter, D. Hovy, and B. Plank. " my
     answer is c": First-token probabilities do not match text answers in instruction-tuned language
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14499, 2024.
[27] Y. Wang, X. Ma, G. Zhang, Y. Ni, A. Chandra, S. Guo, W. Ren, A. Arulraj, X. He, Z. Jiang,
     et al. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01574, 2024.
[28] W. X. Zhao, K. Zhou, J. Li, T. Tang, X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Min, B. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Dong, Y. Du,
     C. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, J. Jiang, R. Ren, Y. Li, X. Tang, Z. Liu, P. Liu, J.-Y. Nie, and J.-R.
     Wen. A Survey of Large Language Models. arXiv, Nov. 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.18223.
     URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.18223. arXiv:2303.18223 [cs].
[29] C. Zheng, H. Zhou, F. Meng, J. Zhou, and M. Huang. Large language models are not robust
     multiple choice selectors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
     2023.
[30] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing,
     et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.


                                                  20
A   Example Questions




                                                   Maths (Pre-primary)
In the core of logical-mathematical relationships and quantification, a preschool educator conducts the following learning
experience with the children: in small groups, she asks them to take two bars of plasticine with the same amount, to make a
big ball with one and small balls with the other. Then, she asks the children: "Where do you think there is more plasticine?".
Considering the presented situation, which logical-mathematical reasoning skill is promoted with this activity?

A) Estimation
B) Conservation
C) Decomposition
D) Correspondence

Correct answer: B
                                                    Literacy (Primary)
A second-grade teacher worked on the story of Cinderella with their class and then conducted a brief assessment of the
students’ levels of understanding. One of the questions the teacher asked was: “Why did Cinderella’s stepsisters insist on
trying on the glass slipper even though it didn’t fit them well?” What evaluation indicator is addressed through the question
asked by the teacher?

A) They recognize the conflict in narrative texts
B) They establish cause relationships in narrative texts
C) They identify sequences of events in narrative texts
D) They identify characteristics of secondary characters in narrative texts

Correct answer: B
                                                Creative arts (Secondary)
Which of the following evaluation activities, conducted before building the group installation, would help students recognize
the level of achievement of their projects?

A) They appreciate, through a dialogue, the sketches of their projects, discussing the proposed visual language
B) They analyze their projects, identifying the coherence between their ideas, materiality, and the selected visual language
C) They identify the materials used in contemporary artists’ installations and contrast them with those selected in their
projects
D) They learn about installation projects carried out in other establishments and analyze them from the visual language
perspective

Correct answer: B
                                                 Technology (Secondary)
In a first-year high school class, the Technology teacher asks the students to develop a project called "Emprendemás." In
this project, the students must create a company that offers a service to address a need of a specific segment of society.
When the students present their ideas explaining the need they will address and the service they will offer, the teacher
notices that some teams are unable to define the market segment to which the service is directed. What activity could the
teacher propose so that the students can determine the segment for which the service they want to offer is destined?

A) Ask the students to analyze the characteristics of the people in whom they detected the need so that they can systematize
the information, and then create an empathy map to understand what they want
B) Ask the teams to watch a video showing the services offered by the competition and determine the type of clients they
serve, and then compare them with the potential recipients of their product
C) Ask the teams to investigate which social segments the competition offers services like those they propose, so that they
can analyze them and determine how they differ, defining the value proposition of the service they are offering
D) Ask the students to create and send an online survey to different people asking if they would use the service they are
proposing, and collect data from the respondents, such as age, salary range, profession, nationality, and gender

Correct answer: A

                                 Table 4: Example questions from the dataset.



                                                             21
B    Data Extraction Prompts




    Data Extraction & Translation Prompt

    You are a highly skilled translator and text processor. I have a text containing paragraphs of
    educational questions and answers in Spanish. I want you to do the following:

    1. **Segment** each paragraph into "Question" and "Answers":
    - "Question" should contain the main body of the paragraph that describes the situation and the
     instruction. Basically, the part before the list of choices. If there is a paragraph of text before the
     actual question, include that as well.
    - "Answers" should include the list of choices (e.g., A, B, C, D) provided after the question.

    2. **Translate** the segmented text into English.

    The text is as follows:
    —–
    paragraph
    —–

    1. Please provide the segmented output in the following JSON format:

    "question": "<Segmented Question>",
    "A": "<Segmented Choice A>",
    "B": "<Segmented Choice B>",
    "C": "<Segmented Choice C>",
    "D": "<Segmented Choice D>"


    2. Please provide the translated output in the following JSON format:

    "question": "<Translated Question>",
    "A": "<Translated Choice A>",
    "B": "<Translated Choice B>",
    "C": "<Translated Choice C>",
    "D": "<Translated Choice D>"




    Prompt OCR

    You are a specialized OCR system trained to deliver highly accurate text extraction. Please
    extract all visible text in each image with precision, including details like formatting, punctuation,
    and capitalization. Maintain the text’s exact sequence as shown in the image without adding or
    omitting any content. Provide only the text as output—no additional comments, descriptions, or
    formatting adjustments.



                                                      22
C    Benchmark Question Prompt




    Prompt

    The following are example multiple choice questions (with answers).

    A preschool educator is working on the following learning objective from the Verbal Language
    core: "Understand, through attentive listening, explicit content from literary and non-literary texts,
    recognizing central ideas, indicating preferences, making simple descriptions, asking about the content."
    To conduct a process evaluation, the following achievement indicator is set: Understands explicit
    content from literary texts. Which of the following activities is appropriate to obtain evidence of the
    level of achievement of the indicated indicator?
    A. The educator shows the children the cover of the fable "The Hare and the Tortoise" and then asks
    them what they think this text will be about
    B. The educator invites the children to act out the fable "The Lion and the Mouse" and then asks them
    about the lesson the story and its characters teach
    C. The educator tells the story "The Color Monster" and then asks the children what colors the emotions
    had that the Color Monster could recognize
    D. The educator invites the children to dramatize the story "No Laughing, Pepe" and then asks them
    what part they liked most about the story and encourages them to create another ending to the story
    Correct Answer: C

    A second-grade teacher worked on the story of Cinderella with their class and then con-
    ducted a brief assessment of the students’ levels of understanding. One of the questions the teacher
    asked was: “Why did Cinderella’s stepsisters insist on trying on the glass slipper even though it didn’t fit
    them well?” What evaluation indicator is addressed through the question asked by the teacher?
    A. They recognize the conflict in narrative texts
    B. They establish cause relationships in narrative texts
    C. They identify sequences of events in narrative texts
    D. They identify characteristics of secondary characters in narrative texts
    Correct Answer: B

    A teacher is working on the inferential level of reading comprehension based on the reading
    of the following short story: Vacations. Next year my family plans to go to the moon. My mother told
    me to invite a friend if I wanted, of course, to not get bored she must think. The truth is that I’m not
    very excited, I don’t know, I’ve never liked going off the planet much, I prefer to eat noodles with sauce
    and cheese. Anyway, my friend says she would love to go, but tells me she needs a new bikini, they say
    women on the moon are very beautiful, but I don’t believe it. We will stay at the Hotel Armstrong
    and travel on Pullmanmoon (hopefully it has a bathroom). I’ll bring a melon. (Catalina Yáñez) What
    question could the teacher ask the students to promote reading at the inferential level?
    A. What does the protagonist feel about the trip to the moon?
    B. What should a vacation trip to the moon be like?
    C. Why does the protagonist’s mother tell her to invite a friend?
    D. What attitude does the protagonist take regarding the trip at the end of the story?
    Correct Answer: D

    Answer the following real question using same answer format:

    This model is based on learning to read and write progressively, step by step, with explicit
    teaching of letters, types of syllables, words, sentences, and finally texts, starting from mastering the
    code to understanding more complex texts, that is, it is framed within the processes of decoding reading.
    Which reading teaching model is this methodological approach related to?
    A. Integrated
    B. Holistic
    C. Skills-based
    D. Transactional

    Only answer the real question.
    Only provide the letter for your answer.
    Stop exactly after the letter.



                                                        23
D    Full results




 Model                                 Accuracy   Company       Model                          Accuracy   Company
 Gemini-2.5 Pro                         88.77     Google        Gemini-1.5 Pro                  73.86     Google
 o3                                     87.88     OpenAI        Qwen-3 8B                       73.53     Alibaba
 Claude Opus 4 Thinking (low)           87.43     Anthropic     Claude-3.5 Sonnet June          73.08     Anthropic
 Claude Sonnet 4 Thinking (low)         86.76     Anthropic     Grok Beta                       72.86     xAI
 Deepseek R1 (May ’25)                  86.65     DeepSeek-AI   Gemma-3 27B                     72.64     Google
 o1                                     86.43     OpenAI        o1-Mini                         72.64     OpenAI
 Claude Opus 4                          86.32     Anthropic     Phi-4                           72.19     Microsoft
 Gemini-2.5 Flash                       85.54     Google        Gemini-1.5 Flash                72.19     Google
 Claude-3.7 Sonnet Thinking (medium)    85.43     Anthropic     Doubao-1.5 Lite                 72.08     ByteDance
 GPT-4.5 Preview                        85.21     OpenAI        Yi Lightning                    71.75     01.AI
 Claude Sonnet 4                        84.76     Anthropic     Yi-Large                        71.52     01.AI
 Qwen-3 32B                             82.42     Alibaba       Gemma-2 27B                     71.19     Google
 GPT-4.1                                82.31     OpenAI        Sonar                           70.75     Perplexity
 o4-Mini                                81.98     OpenAI        Mistral Small 3                 70.41     Mistral
 Grok-3                                 81.76     xAI           Nova Lite                       69.97     Amazon
 Llama-4 Maverick                       81.65     Meta          Jamba 1.6 Large                 69.86     AI21labs
 Doubao-1.5 Pro                         80.76     ByteDance     GPT-4o Mini                     69.19     OpenAI
 Grok-3 Mini                            80.65     xAI           Jamba 1.5 Large                 69.08     AI21labs
 Qwen-3 235B (22B active)               80.65     Alibaba       Hunyuan Large                   68.19     Tencent
 Grok-2                                 80.20     xAI           Gemma-3 12B                     67.63     Google
 Mistral Medium 3                       79.98     Mistral       Qwen-2.5 7B                     66.74     Alibaba
 Gemini-2.0 Flash                       79.87     Google        Mixtral-8x22B                   65.85     Mistral
 Qwen-3 30B (3B active)                 79.76     Alibaba       Hunyuan Large (Long Context)    65.41     Tencent
 o3-Mini                                79.42     OpenAI        Gemma-3n E4B                    63.96     Google
 Llama-3.1 405B                         78.75     Meta          GPT-4.1 Nano                    63.52     OpenAI
 Qwen-3 14B                             78.53     Alibaba       Claude-3.5 Haiku                63.29     Anthropic
 Deepseek V3                            78.31     DeepSeek-AI   Nova Micro                      63.18     Amazon
 GPT-4o                                 78.31     OpenAI        LFM-7B                          61.85     Liquid AI
 Command A                              77.86     Cohere        Command-R+ August               61.51     Cohere
 Gemini-2.0 Flash-Lite                  77.64     Google        Jamba Instruct                  61.18     AI21labs
 LearnLM 1.5 Pro                        77.31     Google        Jamba 1.6 Mini                  61.07     AI21labs
 Deepseek V3 0324                       77.09     DeepSeek-AI   Jamba 1.5 Mini                  60.96     AI21labs
 Claude-3 Opus                          76.97     Anthropic     Mixtral-8x7B                    59.84     Mistral
 Qwen-2.5 32B                           76.86     Alibaba       Gemini-1.5 Flash 8B             59.18     Google
 Claude-3.5 Sonnet October              76.75     Anthropic     Llama-3.1 8B                    59.07     Meta
 Claude-3.7 Sonnet                      76.75     Anthropic     Llama-3.2 11B                   59.07     Meta
 Llama-3.2 90B                          76.31     Meta          LFM-3B                          57.06     Liquid AI
 Gemini-2.5 Flash-Lite Preview          76.20     Google        Claude-3 Haiku                  56.95     Anthropic
 Mistral Small 3.1 24B                  75.86     Mistral       Mistral Nemo                    56.95     Mistral
 Qwen-2.5 14B                           75.64     Alibaba       Ministral 8B                    56.40     Mistral
 Qwen-2.5 72B                           75.42     Alibaba       Phi-3.5 Mini                    56.06     Microsoft
 Nova Pro                               75.31     Amazon        Phi-4 Multimodal                53.17     Microsoft
 Mistral Large November                 75.31     Mistral       Ministral 3B                    52.39     Mistral
 Llama-3.3 70B                          75.19     Meta          Gemma-3 4B                      52.39     Google
 GPT-4.1 Mini                           75.08     OpenAI        GPT-3.5 Turbo                   52.28     OpenAI
 Llama-3.1 70B                          74.97     Meta          Phi-3.5 Vision                  51.06     Microsoft
 Llama-4 Scout                          74.53     Meta          Command R7B                     46.05     Cohere
 GPT-4 Turbo                            74.30     OpenAI        Llama-3.2 1B                    28.03     Meta
 GPT-4                                  74.08     OpenAI

Table 5: Accuracy scores on The Pedagogy Benchmark, sorted from highest (top left) to lowest
(bottom right).



                                                         24
 Model                                 Accuracy   Company       Model                          Accuracy   Company
 Gemini-2.5 Pro                         85.91     Google        Llama-3.3 70B                   69.55     Meta
 Claude Opus 4 Thinking (low)           83.64     Anthropic     Mistral Small 3.1 24B           69.55     Mistral
 o3                                     82.27     OpenAI        GPT-4                           69.09     OpenAI
 Claude Sonnet 4 Thinking (low)         80.91     Anthropic     Claude-3 Opus                   68.64     Anthropic
 Claude Opus 4                          80.91     Anthropic     Mistral Small 3                 68.64     Mistral
 Claude Sonnet 4                        80.00     Anthropic     Nova Lite                       68.64     Amazon
 o1-Medium                              79.55     OpenAI        o1-Mini                         68.64     OpenAI
 GPT-4.1                                79.55     OpenAI        Doubao-1.5 Lite                 68.64     ByteDance
 Claude-3.7 Sonnet Thinking (medium)    79.09     Anthropic     Gemini-1.5 Flash                68.18     Google
 Gemini-2.5 Flash                       78.64     Google        Llama-4 Scout                   67.73     Meta
 Deepseek R1 (May ’25)                  78.64     DeepSeek-AI   Jamba 1.5 Large                 67.73     AI21labs
 o4-Mini                                78.64     OpenAI        Hunyuan Large (Long Context)    67.73     Tencent
 GPT-4.5 Preview                        78.18     OpenAI        Claude-3.5 Haiku                67.27     Anthropic
 Grok-2                                 77.27     xAI           Grok Beta                       67.27     xAI
 Mistral Medium 3                       77.27     Mistral       Command-R+ August               66.36     Cohere
 Grok-3 Mini                            75.91     xAI           Jamba 1.6 Large                 66.36     AI21labs
 Gemini-2.0 Flash                       75.91     Google        Claude-3.5 Sonnet October       66.36     Anthropic
 Llama-4 Maverick                       75.45     Meta          Claude-3.5 Sonnet June          66.36     Anthropic
 Qwen-3 32B                             75.45     Alibaba       Gemma-3 12B                     65.91     Google
 Qwen-3 30B (3B active)                 75.45     Alibaba       Yi-Large                        65.91     01.AI
 Qwen-3 235B (22B active)               75.45     Alibaba       Mixtral-8x7B                    65.00     Mistral
 GPT-4.1 Mini                           75.00     OpenAI        Llama-3.2 11B                   65.00     Meta
 Deepseek V3                            74.09     DeepSeek-AI   Sonar                           65.00     Perplexity
 Gemini-2.5 Flash-Lite Preview          73.64     Google        Llama-3.1 8B                    64.55     Meta
 Gemma-3 27B                            73.64     Google        GPT-4.1 Nano                    64.55     OpenAI
 GPT-4o                                 73.64     OpenAI        Yi Lightning                    64.09     01.AI
 Deepseek V3 0324                       73.18     DeepSeek-AI   Phi-3.5 Vision                  63.64     Microsoft
 Gemma-2 27B                            73.18     Google        Mixtral-8x22B                   62.73     Mistral
 Doubao-1.5 Pro                         73.18     ByteDance     Gemma-3n E4B                    62.73     Google
 o3-Mini                                72.73     OpenAI        Mistral Nemo                    62.27     Mistral
 Llama-3.1 405B                         72.27     Meta          Qwen-2.5 7B                     61.82     Alibaba
 Grok-3                                 72.27     xAI           Phi-3.5 Mini                    61.36     Microsoft
 Gemini-1.5 Pro                         72.27     Google        Jamba 1.6 Mini                  60.91     AI21labs
 Command A                              71.82     Cohere        Nova Micro                      60.91     Amazon
 Gemini-2.0 Flash-Lite                  71.82     Google        LFM-3B                          60.00     Liquid AI
 Mistral Large November                 71.36     Mistral       Ministral 8B                    60.00     Mistral
 LearnLM 1.5 Pro                        71.36     Google        Ministral 3B                    59.55     Mistral
 Nova Pro                               71.36     Amazon        LFM-7B                          58.64     Liquid AI
 GPT-4o Mini                            71.36     OpenAI        Jamba Instruct                  58.18     AI21labs
 Qwen-2.5 72B                           70.91     Alibaba       Phi-4 Multimodal                58.18     Microsoft
 Claude-3.7 Sonnet                      70.45     Anthropic     Gemini-1.5 Flash 8B             57.73     Google
 Llama-3.2 90B                          70.45     Meta          Jamba 1.5 Mini                  57.27     AI21labs
 Qwen-3 14B                             70.45     Alibaba       Claude-3 Haiku                  56.36     Anthropic
 Hunyuan Large                          70.00     Tencent       Gemma-3 4B                      55.45     Google
 Llama-3.1 70B                          70.00     Meta          Command R7B                     53.18     Cohere
 GPT-4 Turbo                            70.00     OpenAI        GPT-3.5 Turbo                   52.73     OpenAI
 Qwen-3 8B                              69.55     Alibaba       Llama-3.2 1B                    28.64     Meta
 Phi-4                                  69.55     Microsoft

Table 6: Accuracy scores on The SEND Pedagogy Benchmark, sorted from highest (top left) to lowest
(bottom right).




                                                         25
